CS 191: Qubits, Quantum Mechanics and Computers
===============================================
Introduction -- January 17, 2012
--------------------------------

Today
-----

* What is quantum computation?
* What is this course?
* Double-slit experiment

What is Quantum Computation?
-------

* Computers based on quantum mechanics can solve certain problems
  exponentially faster than classical computers, e.g. factoring
  (Shor's algorithm).

* How to design quantum algorithms?
  + Requires different methodology than for classical algorithms
* Are there limits to what quantum computers can do? (Is not known to solve
  NP-complete problems in polynomial time. Also, halting problem: there are
  undecidable problems, so trivial limit)
* How to implement quantum computers in the laboratory
  + Can you design them so they're scalable?

Quantum computation starts with this realization that if we were to
base our computers on QM rather than classical physics, then they can
be exponentially more powerful.

This was really a big deal because it was believed that it didn't
really matter how you implemented computers; all that you could do was
make each step faster.

The fact that there's something like quantum computers that can be
exponentially faster, this was really a big surprise. And really on
fundamental problems, like factoring.

What this course will focus on is several questions on quantum computers.

Where we are for quantum computers is sort of where computers were
60-70 years ago.

* Size -- room full of equipment
* Reliability -- not very much so
* Limited applications

Ion traps.
------
Can trap a small handful of ions, small number of qubits. No
fundamental obstacle scaling to ~40 qubits over next two years.

Entanglement
------
Basic resource in quantum mechanics. Unique aspect of QM, and one
fundamental to quantum computing

Quantum Teleportation
------
Entanglement.

Quantum Cryptography
------
Ways to use QM to communicate securely (still safe even with Shor's).

This course
-----------

* Introduction to QM in the language of qubits and quantum gates.
* Emphasis on paradoxes, entanglement.
* Quantum algorithms.
* Quantum cryptography.
* Implementing qubits in the laboratory -- spin and more.

There are certain difficulties you can sweep away by focusing on it in
this language. It also highlights certain aspects of QM. Interesting
to focus on these aspects because they lend an alternative
interpretation of QM.

Young's double-slit experiment.
----------

A starting point for understanding quantum mechanics is Young's double-slit
experiment. We start by considering a metal (light-blocking) sheet with one
narrow slit that allows light to pass. Behind this sheet is a sheet of
photoreactive material. If we shine a light perpendicular to the sheet, the
intensity of light that we observe is normally distributed (centered about
the slit, of course).

If we repeat the experiment with two slits placed some distance apart, we
observe bands of high intensity. Now: as we reduce the intensity of the
light, the exact same interference pattern appears, albeit over a longer
timescale. In fact, if we reduce the intensity to the point that it is
probabilistically unlikely for more than one photon to be in transit at any
given point, we still observe the interference pattern after enough time.

Classically, if we did the same experiment by shooting bullets, we would
actually observe the simple sum of the two Gaussians (and thus just observe
two peaks). So why do single photons behave as waves?

This is particle-wave duality at the quantum level. The physics is
completely different -- so different that it defies reason. There are two
aspects of dealing with QM: understanding what those rules are, and
believing that nature works that way. Hopefully you'll suspend your
disbelief and just go with understanding what the rules are.

Now things get interesting: if we track which slit each particle goes
through (by ``painting'' photons with polarizations depending on through
which slits they pass, for instance), then we observe the same result as in
the classical limit.

Tracking which slit each particle goes through leads to a collapse of the
wave function, and we observe particles behaving like particles, not waves.

You may have heard of Schrödinger's cat: we have a cat in a box. If a
certain particle decays, then poison will be released into the box, and the
cat dies. Schrödinger argued that if we do not measure the state of the
particle (i.e. whether it decayed or not), then we must consider the cat to
be simultaneously dead and alive.

This is the Copenhagen (orthodox) interpretation of quantum mechanics. (You
may say that we are wrong; the cat is either dead or alive, we just don't
know which because we do not have enough information. However, this
argument will be refuted in a later lecture when we consider the
Einstein-Podolsky-Rosenthal paradox).

This notion of being in multiple states simultanously (a superposition, if
you will) is tied to the concept of the quantum mechanical wave function:
your probability of measuring and observing a particular outcome is related
to the intensity of this wave function.

The thing that's most troubling about this from actual experience as
well as physics is that there has to be a mechanism. How did nature do
this? We are going to have a completely precise description. But it's
not going to be a mechanism unlike anything else.

Part of understanding QM is coming to terms psychologically with this
superposition of states, the existence in more than one state
simultaneously.
