CS 191: Qubits, Quantum Mechanics and Computers
===============================================
Quantization, Particle in a box, Implementing Qubits
----------------------------------------------------
Feb 23, 2012
------------

A more precise review
=====================
By this point, we've talked about a number of things. Discrete/continuous
quantum systems, measurements, and so forth. So what I'd like to do for the
first half of the lecture is give you a slightly more formal overview of
everything we've talked about before: about the model. In some sense what
we've been talking about has been challenging, but in some sense it's also
rather simple (i.e. we can do a more precise, more formal review of what
we've covered quickly).

Multiple-qubit systems
----------------------
So let's start from the beginning. If our state is a discrete system, &psi;
is an element of a k-dimensional vector space.

The second thing we want to say about quantum states is the following: what
happens if you have two quantum systems, a, a k-level system, and b, an
l-level system? Now we want to understand what happens when we put a and b
together and look at them as a composite system? When you put states
together, you need to take tensor products. If we happen to be in the state
$|i\rangle$ in one system and $|j\rangle$ in the other system, then
corresponding to that we have a state in the composite system as |i\rangle
\otimes |j\rangle, which can be written as $|ij\rangle$, if you're being
especially lazy.

The number of dimensions we get is kl, which is the dimensionality of the
space in which the composite system lives.

This is called taking tensor products.

The new system inherits the properties of the old one; for instance, how do
you compute inner products? Suppose a-system happened to be in the
state |00\rangle, and another was in |++\rangle. What is the angle between
these states? If you were computing the inner product, \langle00|11\rangle,
then you would just take the inner products of the pieces separately.

What is more interesting to us is measuring the probability of a state, and
that corresponds to its magnitude.

Evolution of states
-------------------
We had our Hilbert space, and our evolution was just the rotation of our
Hilbert space. This was a rigid body rotation in that it preserved
angles / distances. So the inner product is not going to change as you do
this rotation.

And then we had our favorite gates, which consisted of things like the
bit-flip (X), phase-flip (Z), Hadamard (H), controlled not (CNOT, a
two-qubit gate).

So now, here's what I wanted to get to. Suppose you have two qubits, and
you apply a gate on each of them. Now you want to understand what operation
was applied. So first we must understand the form of the answer: it will be
a 4x4 matrix. And then to understand how to write out this 4x4 matrix:
effectively, we take the tensor product of the indivdual gate matrices.

A \otimes B = \begin{pmatrix}
a_{00}B & a_{01}B \\ a_{10}B & a_{11}B
\end{pmatrix}

Observables
-----------
So then you have measurements, and we said that measurements correspond to
an observable M, which is a Hermitian operator, i.e. $M_{ij} = M_{ji}^{*}$.

So now, why is an observable M? Because we said when you have a Hermitian
matrix, by the spectral theorem, you have an orthonormal eigenbasis that
correspond to real eigenvalues. What you get as the outcome of a
measurement is some $\lambda_j$. This occurs with probability equal to
the square of the length of the projection onto the eigenspace
corresponding to $\lambda_j$. The new state is $|j\rangle$.

There is a special observable known as the Hamiltonian $\hat{H}$, the
energy observable. In order to solve the Schrödinger equation, which looks
very complex, if you write it in terms of the eigenvectors, we can neatly
partition it into a number of simpler differential equations, one for each
eigenvector. Since these are eigenvectors, the evolution of the system
leaves the direction alone, and all it does is change the amplitude and the
phase. There is a very nice short-hand for writing this: e^{-i\hat{H}t}:
this is our evolution operator, and you can check that it is unitary.

Continuous quantum states
-------------------------
So now let's fill in the corresponding picture for continuous quantum
states.

No longer finite, and it's even continuous. So, like a particle on a line,
and now you have a probability distribution representing your amplitude
(sort of; more like intensity). Usually you talk about what the probability
is of being in some range (of being in the neighborhood of x). If you were
looking at x itself, the amplitude would be zero (excepting Dirac
deltas). So now $\Psi$ is a function mapping $\mathbb{R}$ to
$\mathbb{C}$. It's normalized such that $\int |\Psi|^2dx = 1$. Another way
of saying this is that the inner product of $\Psi$ with itself,
$\langle\Psi|\Psi\rangle$, is 1.

So what's the corresponding vector space we have for a continuous vector
space? We need some set of eigenfunctions that span all complex
numbers.

Then we have this notion of observables in these continuous systems, which
is going to be just like it was in the discrete case. So what does it do?
It takes a state $|\Psi\rangle$ and maps it to $M|\Psi\rangle$. So we'll
just have some operator that maps a wave function to a not necessarily
normalized wave function.

And so we have two examples that we saw: $\hat{x}$, the position
observable, which maps $\Psi(x)$ to $x\Psi(x)$, and then we had $\hat{p}$,
the momentum observable, which maps $\Psi(x)$ to $i\pderiv{\Psi(x)}{x}$.

So we need these to have some notion of Hermitian. We must have
$\langle\phi|M|\psi\rangle = \bar{\langle\psi|M|\phi\rangle}$. We call this
sort of operator "self-adjoint".

Remember: integration by parts.

The momentum matrix would be skew-Hermitian ($M^\dag = -M$), so we had to
multiply by a factor of i.

On this particular homework, all you have to do is work your way through
things like this (whether certain operators are Hermitian or not) and
compute the commutators of certain matrices. Should be an easy or useful
exercise, depending on how used to this sort of thing you are.

So now, let's talk about a particle in a box. We assume there is a box of
length L with infinitely high walls (i.e. infinite square well). Basically,
consider behind the boundaries of these walls there is a potential so large
that the particle cannot afford to leave.

So we want to solve Schrödinger's equation. What are the states? $H =
\frac{\hat{p}^2}{2m} \Psi = \frac{-\hbar^2}{2m}\pderiv{^2}{x^2}
\psi$. Rather than carry this potential around with us, we'll just impose
boundary conditions. $\Psi(0) = \Psi(l) = 0$. So this is H. Remember how we
solved Schrödinger's equation; we solved the eigenvalue problem. We tried
to figure out the eigenvalues $\phi_j$ and the corresponding energies
$E_j$.

So now we want to understand what these eigenvalues look like for
corresponding energies. So what's an eigenfunction of this? The guess (what
we want) is for the eigenfunctions to look like e^{ikx}. Just evaluating
the right-hand-side, we get $E_k = \frac{\hbar^2 k^2}{2m}$. This is both
the energy of $e^{ikx}$ as well as $e^{-ikx}$. So we guessed what the
eigenfunction looked like, and then we checked.

So we checked that $\psi_E(x)$ is going to be of the form Ae^{ikx} +
Be^{ikx}x. When you take linear combinations of the two exponentials listed
above, you might as well take linear combinations of $\cos(kx)$,
$\sin(kx)$. This form is nicer because it is easier to impose the boundary
conditions. Enforcing boundary conditions, we get that $C = 0$ (which makes
sense; cosine is even, and this function is 0 at x=0) and that $D =
\frac{k\pi}{l}$.

We now want to find C, which we can get by enforcing that our wave function
is normalized. use the \int (sin^2 + cos^2) = 2\int (sin^2) trick.

Finally, let's just go back and make two nice observations. Now you finally
see how to implement a qubit. To implement a qubit, you would restrict the
energy to be small enough to be in the first two modes. And then you would
let zero be one qubit and one be the other.
