CS 191: Qubits, Quantum Mechanics and Computers
===============================================
Quantum Algorithms
==================
Feb 28, 2012
------------
Introduction
============
$\newcommand{\pderiv}[2]{\frac{\partial #1}{\partial #2}}$
$\newcommand{\ket}[1]{\left|#1\right>}$
$\newcommand{\abs}[1]{\left|#1\right|}$
Today we're going to make a transition to quantum algorithms. But first, a
brief review of particle-in-a-box.

Particle in a Box
=================
The particle in a box is sort of a toy model for a hydrogen atom. In what
sense? In a hydrogen atom, you have a proton and an electron, and the main
force it is subject to is Coulomb attraction. So for our purposes, as a
very first, very simple model, we'll think of writing out Schr\"odinger's
equation in the radial direction.

We'll think of this electron as not three-dimensional, but
one-dimensional (radial). And instead of dealing with the potential as it
is, we'll approximate it by saying what the potential really does is
confine the electron to within some range $\ell$. What we're going to do is
model the situation by saying that the electron is a free particle in a
box.

* Aside

	It's worth thinking about this: once we solve this, we get a first
  picture what a hydrogen atom looks like. When we plot out the solution,
  what does this tell us about an electron and where it sits? This gives us
  a first approximation; really inexact. But for our purposes, since we are
  not so much wanting an understanding of the hydrogen atom so much as
  wanting a general understanding, this is a great model.

Normally we consider this particle as free to move anywhere, but now we
impose an infinite potential outside of a particular region. Writing out
Schr\"odinger's equation where $H \equiv \frac{-\hbar^2}{2m}
\pderiv{^2}{x^2}$. We initially did this by guessing that the eigenvectors
were of the form $e^{ikx}$. We guessed this, figured out that the
eigenvalues (energies) corresponding to this must be $\frac{\hbar^2 k^2}
{2m}$, and then we said look, what this means is that $e^{ikx}$ and
$e^{-ikx}$ have the same energy, so we might as well just use the sinusoids
$\cos(kx)$ and $\sin(kx)$. We solve for coefficients by imposing the
boundary conditions.

We also went ahead and normalized our wave function by saying $\int_0^\ell
\abs{\psi_n(x)}^2dx = 1$. What this further gives us is that $D =
\sqrt{\frac{2}{\ell}}$. So our general solution is $\psi_n(x) = \sqrt{\frac{2}
{\ell}}\sin\frac{n\pi x}{\ell}$. This tells us about the quantization of
energies. The fact that it takes on these discrete values means that you
get these standing waves of definite energy.

There's also a way of making this analogy a little more quantitative. We
can attempt to go ahead and do that. If we look at $E_2 - E_1$ (the energy
difference between the first excited state and the ground state), for our
model, we got $\frac{3\hbar^2 \pi^2}{2m\ell^2}$. Assume $\Delta E \approx
10$ eV; let's find out what $\ell$ is (compared to $\ell_H \approx 1
\AA$, the actual value). We could substitute and solve, and we get roughly
$3.4 \AA$. As long as you make sure your energy is small, what you know is
that your particle is always in some superposition of the $n=1$ and $n=2$
states.

Precession of phase
-------------------
Remember that you are in always in some superposition of states, which
evolves over time. So I hope you can see what your qubit is, now. The
associated value of a qubit corresponds to a particular superposition. If
you do an inner product between any two of these superpositions, you get
complete cancellation.

We get a changing phase, yes, but this is no big deal; we can simply
account for a moving reference frame.

Because we have this phase precession, if you look at what the frequency
corresponds to, it's whatever the frequency of visible light is, let's
say. The fact you have this precession at this frequency allows you to
control this qubit from the outside using light (lasers). So somehow, in
this formulation, what you have is an implementation of qubits, and
secondly, you have a hint of how you're going to control this qubit from
the outside. How do you apply various gates? You now have this method of
reaching in and constraining the evolution of the quantum state.

* Aside

	One other thing which we may or may not get to is this whole notion of
  cooling. This is a big deal in quantum computing and quantum systems. How
  do you cool your system down to a desired level? Once you're down to the
  quantum level, cooling itself looks like an algorithm. So there's this
  notion of algorithmic cooling. Just wanted to point this out as a lead as
  to where we are going to get to in a few weeks.

* Intermission

Quantum Algorithms
==================
Inspiration
-----------
A one-qubit system belongs to $\mathbb{C}^2$; a two-qubit system belongs to
$\mathbb{C}^4$; an n-qubit system belongs to $\mathbb{C}^{2^n}$. This is a
result of repeated applications of the tensor product.

Note that even a 500-qubit system requires $2^{500}$ complex numbers to
describe. This number is larger than the number of particles in the
universe; larger than the estimated age of the universe in femtoseconds;
even larger than the product of these two numbers. This just comes from the
basic axioms of quantum mechanics. In order to even remember the state of
this 500-qubit system -- just to remember that state, it's almost as if
nature has $2^{500}$ pieces of scratch paper lying around somewhere.

Moreover, if the system interacts with something else, with the outside
world, the state needs to be updated -- it needs to be updated, even, at
every moment in time, at every smallest time step. If this were not a
theory which we read about in a science class, it's insane to think that
this is how hard nature must work to keep this tiny system going.

You have a choice, now. You can either get stuck in this philosophical
mode, or ignore how nature stores this information and just focus on how to
make use of this. A computer, once you get past the packaging, is just an
experiment in physics. The only difference between a computer and an
experiment in physics is that in an experiment in physics, you're trying to
understand how physics works, whereas when you're using a computer, you
already understand the physics and are just tricking nature to solve
interesting problems for you.

Furthermore, remember that entanglement disrupts the principle of locality.

So why use classical computers, when nature is working so hard to keep
track of these quantum systems?

It's almost as if quantum systems have the ability to store and process
exponential amounts of information. It's rather exciting: quantum mechanics
tells us that nature is exponentially extravagant. So you could solve
problems exponentially faster. But nature is extremely private. When you
make a measurement, all you see is one of these values. So this is the main
problem in quantum computing. You have this entity who, behind the scenes
is carrying out these totally extravagant gyrations, computations, and you
think to yourself, if we took our most difficult problems and mapped it
onto that? Except that nature also guards all of this very
jealously. Whenever you try to query, nature, tries to pretend nothing much
was going on.

So what quantum computation is about is trying to tease this information
out of nature. How do you design algorithms where you can really map the
question, the problem of interest, into this space such that even the
outcome of the measurement tells you a lot about the system?

We somehow take this 500-qubit system, put it into some state, and set it
to evolve over time. At the end of this time evolution, we make a
measurement and just get back 500 measly classical bits. We say to
ourselves, we couldn't have gotten them ourselves. Either these are the
solution to our problem, or we can post-process them very quickly to get
our solution. Even though this $x$ doesn't seem like much, there was a lot
going on to create $x$, and we can extract this information from $x$.

What we can solve in this manner are questions in the form of
puzzles. [ Description of NP-complete problems. ]

For example, the quantum algorithm for factoring, where you're given some
semiprime $n \equiv pq$ (although not really necessary) as input. We'll create some
sequence of superpositions, and we'll get $x$.

If $n$ were a few hundred bits, $x$ would be a few hundred bits, and we'd
be able to extract $p$ and $q$ in a fairly straightforward manner from
here. Except classically, this would take exponential time to compute (in a
few hundred bits).

What are the tools we'll be using? Hadamard gate, which is a one-qubit gate
corresponding to the two-dimensional DFT, or changing from the bit basis to
the sign basis (namely, between conjugate bases). This is our quantum
Fourier transform, most likely.

What we'll do next time is understand the transformation corresponding to
performing a Hadamard on every individual qubit.
