CS 191: Qubits, Quantum Mechanics and Computers
===============================================
Quantum Algorithms
==================
Mar 6, 2012
-----------
Today, we are going to resume our study of quantum algorithms, but I'll
start with the basics of what it means to have a quantum circuit in the
first place, and then we'll move on to a quantum algorithm.

Let's start with the first part, which is about the basics of designing
quantum algorithms. What circuits does one use, what does it mean to design
a circuit; things like that.

First question: Quantum computers are a) digital, b) analog. Why digital?
Input is a sequence of zeroes and ones; we input our qubits in some digital
form. Output is also in the form of zeroes of ones -- concept of
measurements.

Internally, qubits look both digital as well as analog: coefficient looks
analog; ket is digital. Really the coefficients are not analog, since we do
not care too much about infinite precision (cannot care, really). Where
else does it come from? It is unitary.

So it's not as though these are going to have chaotic dynamics; being off
by a little step doesn't spell the end of the world. No butterfly effect.

So that's lesson number one.

Lesson number two. So how did we actually design classical qubits,
classical circuits? There is this concept that certain gates that are
universal, e.g. NAND. Talk about how to construct all possible two-input
gates with NAND.

So: quantum gates. We have various examples of quantum gates, e.g. CNOT, H,
X, Z, $\frac{\pi}{8}$ rotations. So what do these mean? Suppose you have an
arbitrary gate U that we want to implement. Maybe it's a two-qubit gate;
maybe three; maybe one.

Remember, in this case, we can specify U by 16 complex numbers. But these
have infinite precision. We are not going to be able to implement infinite
precision with finitely many bits. So what we want to do is implement
something that is $\epsilon$ close to this. Instead use universal gates to
implement $U_\epsilon$. We'll measure this $\epsilon$, and we'll claim that
these two transformations are very close to each other (i.e. identical
states are sent to similar states; only changes distance by at most
$\epsilon$).

Also, the cost in terms of $\epsilon$ is not going to be very large. The
number of universal gates will scale just as $\log^2\frac{1}{\epsilon}$. So
all this, we're just going to take for granted. In fact, in our quantum
algorithms, we'll use relatively simple-looking gates.

So far, what we've learned is that quantum computers are digital, and
there's a universal family of gates.

These were both ways in which quantum computers were similar to classical
computers. Now let's start exploring the differences.

The first difference is that quantum computers are reversible.

You have some quantum circuit. It takes as input some number of qubits,
outputs the same number of qubits. Inside you have quantum gates. That is
your quantum circuit. $U_c$ is unitary, which means that $U_c^{-1} =
U_c^\dag$. In general, you will still get the mirror image, except you will
replace each gate by its Hermitian conjugate.

So now we have a problem. Suppose we have a classical circuit $C_n$ for
computing f. Now suppose $f$ is a boolean function, so $f(x)$ is just a
bit. Imagine there was a quantum circuit for doing this. We really are
computing all n bits. These other bits, together with f, allow us to
reconstruct $x$. Since quantum computers are reversible, any arbitrary
circuit is just a injective map.

Remember our basic classical circuit, our NAND gate. This was not injective
-- it mapped four possible inputs to two possible outputs.

Let's remember this qwuestion: why can't you just discard the bits that you
don't need? It turns out, this is a very crucial issue in quantum computing.

If this is a constraint that we have on our quantum circuits (unitary), we
have to do something: we have to make our classical circuits look like
this. We'll show that we can take any classical circuit and make it
reversible. So given a classical circuit, first make it reversible, then
we'll simulate it quantumly. That is our answer.

So how to make classical reversible computation? What you must do, if
you're doing classical computation reversibly, the first thing you must do
is increase the number of inputs. Now, being reversible means that it has
to be true at every step. You can't possibly throw away anything. You can't
ever discard information: you can transform it, but you cannot discard
it.

So now, what this shows is that you can take any classical circuit $C$
which has NOT gates and AND gates, and you can transform it into a
reversible circuit $R_c$ with more outputs (we need these to maintain
injectivity). We don't like this junk. What we'd like is to further
transform this into a circuit of the kind that we really like, $\hat{R_c}$,
that preserves the inputs as well as the desirable outputs.

The secret lies with the $CNOT$.

Back to what we did last time: suppose you had a boolean function $f$ and a
circuit $C$ that represented it. Now suppose you have a quantum equivalent
$U_f$. What we said was that since this is now a quantum circuit, we can
run it over a superposition of inputs.

Let's say you have a qubit that you feed into this circuit. What the
circuit does for you is it creates junk. It happens to be a CNOT
gate. Meaning, this was a circuit that on input $\ket{x0}$ outputs
$\ket{xx}$. However, suppose that we intended to do a Hadamard
transform. The "junk" prevents the interference that we desire. This is why
we do not leave junk lying around: we generally do not know what
interference it will cause, or where.

There's a corollary to all of this: **throwing away / discarding is the
same thing as measurement.**

So in other words, what all this shows you is that if you had a qubit and
wanted to measure it, one way to measure it would be to throw it away and
never interact with it again.

Claim: Measuring in the standard basis is equivalent to doing a CNOT, and
then continuing.
