CS 191: Qubits, Quantum Mechanics and Computers
===============================================
Simon's Algorithm
=================
Mar 8, 2012
-----------
We're still working in this toy model. Last time, we showed that we can get
some sort of speedup for Fourier sampling. While this was on the order of
n, we can actually get a speedup of $2^n$

Review of Fourier sampling
--------------------------
Applying a Hadamard transform to all inputs, we get somme sort of analogue
to the FFT.

Adding slit patterns (going back and considering double-slit
experiment). Input corresponds to the slit pattern. And then, given the
slit pattern, we say it is hard to figure out what the interference pattern
looks like.

Simon's Algorithm
-----------------

We are given a circuit that computes a function. f is 2-1. Namely, there
are $2^n$ possible inputs, and there are $2^{n-1}$ possible outputs in a
particular way: there is some secret s of length n, and we know that $f(x)
= f(x \oplus s)$. Other than that, it could be anything. What you want to
do is find $s$.

Let $n = 3$. Let $s = 101$. So:

$$f(000) = f(101) \equiv 000
\\ f(001) = f(100) \equiv 010
\\ f(010) = f(111) \equiv 001
\\ f(001) = f(110) \equiv 100
$$

So how do you find s? Classically, you'd find two inputs that map to the
same string. You'd expect this to take roughly $2^{n/2}$ tries: consider
birthday paradox. What this is saying is classically, this is a hard
problem. And now we are going to see how to solve this quantumly in $n$ or
$n^2$ steps.

The first thing we are going to do is take this circuit (remember that if
we can compute something, we can also compute it reversibly) and write down
the reverse of this circuit.

Once this is a reversible circuit, we can also implement every gate
quantumly. We then map this to a quantum circuit which does the exact same
thing.

With the quantum circuit, you can input a superposition, and you'll get a
superposition of the outputs as your result. We've seen this before in the
form of phase states, but we'll use this in a different manner today.

Example:

We start with the Hadamard transform, $H^{\otimes n}$, and we feed in
zeroes. So what's the state at this point? It's a total superposition of
all states. After we feed this into our circuit, our state is a
superposition of the sum over all x of f(x).

Working through the math, we find that we get a random $y$ such that $s
\cdot y = 0$. Thus we have a single linear equation, and so we just need
$n-1$ equations to uniquely solve for s.

Okay. So let's go back and look at a general circuit. So we start with n
zeroes, do a Hadamard to get into a superposition of all possible
inputs. Now we are in the state where we have every $n$-bit state with equal
amplitude, but now it's entangled with this other register $f(x)$. At this
point, we measure these n bits (and we see some $f(z)$) -- and so we got
some random input.

Now we do another Hadamard transform and another measurement. We want to
figure out what we get as the result of this second measurement. We claim
that our output is a random $y$ such that $y \cdot s = 0$.

This is what we said before, but now more general.

Let's prove this. After the Hadamard, let's say we're in a state $\sum_y
\alpha_y \ket{y}$; $\alpha_y = \frac{1}{\sqrt{2}}(-1)^{z \cdot y} +
\frac{1}{\sqrt{2}}(-1)^{s \ cdot y}$. Now, we can see that this is equal to
zero if $s \cdot y = 1$ and two if $s \cdot y = 0$. Therefore the only
values remaining in this superposition are those such that $s \cdot y = 0$.
