CS 191: Qubits, Quantum Mechanics and Computers
===============================================
Quantum Algorithms
==================
Mar 13, 2012
-----------
Today, we are going to set things up for the quantum factoring algorithm,
which we will cover on Thursday. To do that, we have to generalize the
Hadamard transform into the quantum Fourier transform. What we are going to
cover is the quantum Fourier transform: its properties as well as how to
use it.

Today, we'll regard period-finding as an abstract problem we want to
solve. Next time, we'll show how to use period-finding to factor.

So what's a quantum Fourier transform? It's really a quantum implementation
of the discrete Fourier transform.

So if $\omega$ is a primitive nth root of unity, then all of the powers
$\omega^j$ are also roots of unity.

So the quantum Fourier transform is going to look just like the Hadamard
transform except there are phases in it.

The discrete Fourier transform
------------------------------
$$
F = \frac{1}{\sqrt{n}}\begin{pmatrix}
1 & 1 & .. & 1
\\ 1 & \omega & \omega^2 & .
\\ . & . & . & . & .
\\ 1 & . & . & . & .
\end{pmatrix}
$$

$F_{jk}  = e^{ijk2\pi/n}$

Primitive square root of unity: $e^{i2\pi n}$. When we do $F_n$, it's the
same, but with phases.

Showing that $\braket{F_i}{F_j} = \delta_{ij}$...


Properties of the Fourier Transform
-----------------------------------
This is a proper circuit, and in fact, you can implement it very very
efficiently.

The QFT is very efficient to implement by a quantum circuit.

Let's talk about what you'd get if you tried to implement it.

Considerations with regards to cyclic shifts: effect only shows up in
phases.

So by the way: in quantum computing, what is the significance of phases?
They don't matter in the context of a measurement.

To eliminate effects of relative phase, we do a Fourier transform and then
measure. Basically, multiplication-convolution property.

One more property of Fourier transforms, and then big picture.

The next property is the periodicity property of Fourier transforms. Part
of a much more general property that we won't talk about.

Suppose that $k\divides N$. Suppose that our superposition has period
k. The claim is that if you do a Fourier transform, you get something
that's periodic with period $N/k$ (time-frequency uncertainty
principle).

Note that this quantum Fourier transform can be implemented in $O(\log n)$
qubits, but only gives us the value at one index.

What I'll do for next time is to sweep some things under the rug; try to do
these things so very cleverly that you don't notice. Furthermore,
sometimes, if you see things too slowly, it's hard to understand. So next
time, I'll work hard to make sure that you see the big picture. So if
there's one lecture where you come in and think that you're going to be
fully alert, next time should be it.
