CS 191: Qubits, Quantum Mechanics and Computers
===============================================
Quantum Factoring
==================
Mar 15, 2012
-----------
Introduction
============
Turns out that if you want to factor a number, it is sufficient to show
that we just need to split it up into its components.

The length of the input is $\log N$. That is, the number of bits.

So let's say that we've got a 1024-bit semiprime N. Linear is not at all
feasible -- larger number than age of universe in femtoseconds. So what we
want is to factor this in $\log N$. The best classical algorithms we have
run in some sort of exponential time.

So what we can see is a quantum algorithm that runs in time $\log^3 N or
\log^2 N$. All that matters is that it's polynomial with respect to $\log
N$. Now, factoring is extremely important because it is used in
cryptography -- RSA (which is behind various cryptographic schemes like
TLS).

Two things we'll need to understand: quantum subroutine -- finding the
period of a periodic function, and show how we can solve factoring using
this subroutine. For that, we'll need to understand something about modular
arithmetic. We'll use these to show how to go to factoring in polynomial
time.

Period-finding
==============
Given a periodic function f with period k such that $\{0, 1, ..., M-1\}
\mapsto S$ (i.e. $f(x) = f(x+k)$), assuming that we are working $\mod M$,
and k divides N, the challenge is to find k.

To appreciate this problem, think of M and k as being very large. You are
given some circuit for computing f: you input x, and you get as output
$f(x)$. This is a little like Simon's algorithm.

Now we're going to use M as the dimension of our quantum Fourier
transform. We'll do this quickly and somehow output k. So let's see how we
do that.

Recall properties of Fourier transform: convolution-multiplication property
(this manifests as phases applied to the output, and upon measurement, this
phase conveniently drops out), treatment of periodic functions ($\sum \ket
{jk} \fourier \sum \ket{j\frac{N}{k}}$) -- output is also periodic.

Our period-finding circuit will look very familiar. What we do is start
with a Fourier transform of dimension M, and input the state zero into this
Fourier transform. The result is a superposition over all states.

Now, let's feed this into $U_f$ (with enough scratch zeroes to fill all the
inputs), then measure the second register. Suppose we get some z as the
result of our measurement. What must the first register of $U_f$ be? A
superposition over all the states equal to $z \mod k$ ($\sqrt{\frac{k}{m}}
\sum_j\ket{jk + z}$). Now, if you measure this, you get a random number
$mod M$, which gives us nothing.

So what we want to do, therefore, is put this z into the phase so we can
ignore it, i.e. feed this into the quantum Fourier transform. Now we want
to measure. Now, measuring, we get some $r\frac{M}{k}$, where r is some
random integer between 0 and $k-1$. Recall, what we want is k. We can
consider the gcd of different measurements. Presumably if we sample a few
times and take the gcd, then this will readily lead to our goal. (note that
our samples must be collectively relatively prime in order for us to get
the correct answer, so $\log N$ samples is an approximate upper bound).

Note that the gcd can be found quickly using Euclid's algorithm.

Shor's Algorithm
================
So now we want to factor. This algorithm works for any number, but for now,
we're concerned only with semiprimes: $N = pq$, for $p,q$ prime.

Here's a claim: Given that you can solve this problem (order-finding), then
you can factor. Let $ord_N(x) =$ order of $x$. (the minimum $r > 0$ such
that $x^r = 1 (\mod N)$ -- this exists iff x relatively prime to N
(Fermat's Little Theorem). This assumes that $\mathtt{gcd}(x,N) = 1$ -- if
it isn't, then we can trivially factor.

The claim is that if you can find the order of $x \mod N$, you can
factor. Classically, this wasn't even considered because finding the order
of $x$ was potentially more difficult than factoring. But now we have this
completely magical period-finding algorithm.

Claim: if the order is even and $x^{r/2} \neq -1$, one factor is either
$gcd(N, x^{r/2} - 1)$ or $gcd(N, x^{r-2} + 1)$. Somehow, once you've
figured out the order, it's easy to find the factors: this is for a very
good reason.

There's a secret fact: if N is a composite, when you take the square root
of one, you have more than just $\pm 1$. These square roots are great,
because once you've found them, you've factored the number.

Consider this:

$$\newcommand{\divides}{\big|}
x^{r/2} \neq \pm 1
\\ y \neq \pm 1
\\ y \pm 0
\\ N \not\divides\;\; y
$$

Thus

$$
x^r = 1
\\ y^2 = 1
\\ y^2 - 1 = 0
\\ N \divides y^2 - 1
\\ N \divides (y+1)(y-1)
$$

We exploit the periodicity of modular exponentiation: f is periodic with
period r (the order). Thus we can use the period-finding algorithm to
determine the order of x.

Thus to factor N, we pick x at random mod N and use the function $f(a) =
x^a$ in our period-finding subroutine. What does a subroutine do? We invoke
the subroutine many times, and each time we get some number, and we take
the gcd... and eventually, from the subroutine, we get r.

Repeat this until r is even and $x^{r/2} \equiv -1$.

Compute $gcd(x^{r/2} + 1, N)$ and output this.

Recap
=====

Note that what we stressed here was the quantum part of this algorithm. If
you wish, you can see the details of the modular arithmetic: chapter 0
in CS170 text. For those of you who have the background, last chapter.
