CS 191: Qubits, Quantum Mechanics and Computers
===============================================
Quantum Search
==============
Mar 20, 2012
------------

This is the main problem with quantum algorithms, that you're sort of
searching for a needle in a haystack.

So how long does it take? Usually a function of how large the haystack
is. One way to think of it is that you have a table with n entries, and one
of these is marked, and you're looking for the marked entry.

So classically, you could of course try every entry until you find the
marked one, which takes on the order of n steps. Randomized, you could
expect to find it halfway through your search.

What we're going to see today is called Grover's algorithm. It's a quantum
algorithm that does this in $\sqrt{n}$ steps. It's very strange in that you
get to know without looking at all of the steps.

So... what does this have to do with anything? In general, when we are
trying to find an algorithm for something (when we are trying to solve a
computational problem), our problem is as follows: given some input x, we
want to find something. Whether this is 3-SAT, TSP, factoring; we want to
find some output (answer).

Often finding the answer is difficult, but once you have it, you can
convince yourself that it's a good answer (i.e. it's in NP).

There's a real dichotomy: searching for an answer might be exponentially
hard, but checking said answer is easy (i.e. verifiable in polynomial
time).

It turns out that even though checking the answer is easy, we *believe*
that finding the answer is hard. There are all sorts of problems in
here. We strongly believe that $\mathrm{P} \neq \mathrm{NP}$. What we can
show is that if there are hard problems, then the NP-complete problems are
definitely hard.

Remember, all NP-complete problems are just search problems. So this
searching for a needle in a haystack is actually at the crux of these
problems.

Thus with Grover's algorithm, we can get a quadratic speedup for these
NP-complete problems.

Given a function $f \{1 .. N\} \mapsto \{0, 1\}$, find x such that $f(x) =
1$. We'll focus on the hardest case where we have only one possible x.

We could also convert this into a quantum circuit. Now, we can feed in a
superposition of states, and you'll get the same superposition of
corresponding outputs.

What the algorithm will do
==========================

Let's consider $N = 2^n$. The way our algorithm will work is that it'll
start with this superposition of all these states. How do we do that? A
Hadamard.

Then we apply the function, then apply a bit flip (X). All of the states of
our superposition that correspond to zeroes are now ones, and the one state
that corresponds to one is now zero.

If you were to consider these amplitudes and compute the arithmetic mean,
it's approximately $\frac{1}{\sqrt{N}}$. So what we're going to do is this
really funny operation; we're going to reflect all these amplitudes about
the mean. If it's above the mean, it goes below the mean by an equal
amount; if it's below the mean, it goes above the mean by an equal
amount. We can iterate this until roughly the halfway point.

This particular algorithm is called the quantum algorithm for searching a
database, which is nonsense. In order to use a quantum algorithm, you must
first feed the entire database into the quantum algorithm. Even if
searching took a single step, you've already taken n steps to convert it.

The entire point of this algorithm is to search for a Travelling Salesman
path, for instance.

Implementing
============

We'll start by doing a Hadamard on our original state of zeroes, and now
we'll have our superposition over all states.

For the second step, the suggestion is that we should use the circuit for
$f(x)$.

The third step is strange: it's a reflection about the mean. So what's the
mean? $\mu = \sum x\alpha^2_x \ket{\alpha_x}$. Let's first understand what
it means to reflect about the state $\ket{0^n}$. We leave alone the
component in the $\ket{0^n}$ direction and flip the phase of every other
component. So a reflection about $\ket{0^n}$ would look like
$\begin{pmatrix} 1 & 0 & 0 & ... \\ 0 & -1 & 0 & ... \\ 0 & 0 & -1 & ... \\
... & ... & ... & ...\end{pmatrix}$. So how do we do this for the uniform
vector? We simply do a change of basis such that this is our zero vector,
do this operation, then revert our basis. This is usually called D, our
diffusion operator. $D = H^{\otimes n} Z^\prime H^{\otimes n}$.

Replacing each $\alpha_j$ with $\beta_j \equiv 2\mu - \alpha_j$ is just the
reflection about the mean.

Actual circuit
==============

We know how to do the first two stages. Then we want this special
transformation: first do a Hadamard, then reflect about $\ket{0^n}$. We
have a function that outputs one whenever this isn't $\ket{0^n}$ --
something we can implement classically, so this is not a problem -- then we
can feed this into our conditional phase flip.

The important thing about these algorithms is that they have special
structure, and so they have small corresponding quantum circuits.
