CS 191: Qubits, Quantum Mechanics and Computers
===============================================
Guest lectures: implementation of qubits
========================================
April 3, 2012
-------------

Kevin Young: kcyoung@berkeley.edu

We'll start with how to implement qubits using spins, and eventually culminate in
NMR.

Today, what we're going to do is start looking at physical implementations
of QC. Will continue through the end of next week. How to build an actual
physical quantum computer. Implementation choice: NMR (one of first QC
where a quantum algorithm was demonstrated).

Start with basics, i.e. fundamental building blocks: spin qubits. Approach:
start with experiments people did quite a while ago, back when people were
still trying to understand QM, what systems were quantized. The experiments
we're going to look at, we're going to use their results to build up a
physical theory and apply this theory to qubits. We're going to look at how
this gives us nice pictures to use.

Ultimate goal of lecture: understand how to write down the state and work
with the state of a two-level system.

We're going to start out with some experimental results, assuming we know
enough QM to push us along a little bit: understand quantum states and how
they work. Not going to necessarily understand right away what quantum
model we can use to describe these experiments.

Backdrop: look at experiment called the Stern-Gerlach device. Conflicting
theories about how magnetic field of small atoms should behave. Two
theories. One: electrons should act like little tiny bar magnets ("bar
magnet theory") -- one feature: these acted like classical bar magnets --
magnetic dipoles that can be oriented arbitrarily in a magnetic field. Two:
in light of all this new QM, in the presence of a magnetic field, then this
bar magnet should only take one of two possible directions: up and down
(quantum theory).

Simple experiment: looking at how classical bar magnets behave in magnetic
fields. Background: if I put a bar magnet in a magnetic field, the
classical description corresponds to how much energy it has depending on
its orientation. Since bar magnets like to align with magnetic fields, you
can write down that energy $U = -\vec{\mu} \cdot \vec{B}$. B is the
magnetic field; $\mu$ is the magnetic dipole moment. If parallel, we have a
relative energy of -1, and if antiparallel, we have a relative energy of 1
(relatively high energy). Shows that dipole likes to be aligned with
magnetic field.

What Stern and Gerlach noticed was that we can separate out parallel from
antiparallel by making the magnetic field not constant. The magnetic moment
is aligned with the field, so in this case, energy is just $-\mu B$. So the
energy will go down if magnetic field goes up. Reasoning: objects want to
move to lower potentials. Wants to bend toward area where potential energy
is lower. If dipole is pointed up, it'll move and point down.

Now let's say we had an oven, and by saying it's an oven, we mean that it
just spits out a continuous stream of these quantum or classical dipoles of
totally random spins (as random as the theory will allow), and we connect
the output of this oven to a SG machine. Let's say we have quantum dipoles
coming out of that oven. In the quantum model, on the screen, we will see
two points (for the most part). The classical theory predicts a continuous
distribution.

Saw two peaks.

Reasoning for the classical result to not be flat: orientation is uniformly
chosen from points on unit sphere.

Argument of Summerfeld (quantum theory): wrong theory, but correct results.

So more playing around with SG experiment. Oven spits out these completely
random quantum particles. And then it hits this device. One of the things
we need to do is give it a label corresponding to direction of magnetic
field. We can label this by $\hat{n}$. What we're going to get out is two
beams. We're going to label these two beams the same way we labeled the SG
device. We'll label the top one using some quantum notation we've already
learned. For now, we'll call these $\ket{\hat{n}^+}$ and
$\ket{\hat{n}^-}$. Check if these are appropriate labels by feeding into a
second SG device, also pointing the same direction.

Saw only one beam coming out in the same direction as the other one. This
is a little bit affirming. I can do an experiment that is effectively
measuring something: the alignment (or anti-alignment) with the field lines
of the box. Measurements; since we measure again in the same basis, we get
the same result.

Nice, interesting result, but now let's change the situation again. Now we
have $\hat{n}$, and we only let $\ket{\hat{n^+}}$ through. Now this second
box is pointed in a different direction. What do we get if m is very close
to n?  $\ket{\hat{m}^+$ is very bright (relatively). Probability of $+$ is
$\frac{1}{2}(1 + \hat{m} \cdot \hat{n})$, and probability of $n$ is
$\frac{1}{2}(1 - \hat{m} \cdot \hat{n})$. How do we find probabilities in
QM? Squared inner product.

These equations relate the experiment to a theory we haven't figured out
yet. So we need to figure out a way to describe this. SG as entangling
degrees of freedom.

So: back to what we were talking about before. Must build physical theory
that is consistent with these relationships. One thing we haven't done yet:
(we know these things are quantum states) decide dimensionality. We can
always write these as vectors, but how many numbers are we going to need to
describe these. We need two numbers to describe the points on a
2-sphere. Fundamental: only got two answers out. The simplest picture that
you could imagine is that you have a 2-level quantum system. If all of your
experiments could be described by two outputs, then the first thing that it
might be worth trying is describing this quantum state with a
2-vector. Could be wrong, but it's a good place to start.

In physics we really like things that are up and down, so we'll give these
special names. Instead of calling these $\ket{z^+}$ and $\ket{z^-}$, we'll
call these $\ket{0}$ and $\ket{1}$. Represent all these $\hat{n}$ states in
terms of $\ket{0}$ and $\ket{1}$. We know that if in fact our system is a
2-dimensional quantum system, $\hat{n} = \alpha\ket{0} + \beta\ket{1}$. So
what we're going to figure out is if we can determine $\alpha,
\beta$. Something useful: go back to polar (spherical) coords. What we're
going to do now is see if we can figure out something about $\alpha$,
$\beta$. We know that if we choose $\ket{0}$, then $\ket{0} \equiv
\ket{z^+}$. (z is direction SG device points). We want to see if we can
write $\ket{n^+}$ in terms of zeros and ones.

Working out the math, we get $\abs{\alpha} = \cos\frac{\theta}{2},
\abs{\beta} = \sin\frac{\theta}{2}$. However, we don't have phases
(yet).

Note that we don't care about absolute phases; relative phases are all that
actually matter (reasoning: we can multiply through by some complex
exponential to cancel out the phase on one term).

Let's say that an x SG device is moving, and it hits a y SG device, and it
outputs $\ket{y^+}, \ket{y^-}$. Only difference between these states is
the absolute phase (rather, the relative phase between the two states).

Working out the math (once again), we get $\frac{1}{2}\parens{1 +
\cos(\lambda_y - \lambda_x)} = \frac{1}{2}$, so $\lambda_y, \lambda_x$ are
perpendicular (relative phase is $\frac{\pi}{2}$).

What this tells me is that I can represent any quantum state as a unit
vector. So if I have some state $\ket{n^+}$, I can associate it with a point on
a unit sphere. This picture also tells me that $\ket{n^-}$ is the opposite
point on the sphere. Orthogonal states correspond to antiparallel vectors
(antipodal points).
