CS 191: Qubits, Quantum Mechanics and Computers
===============================================
Qubits, Superposition, & Measurement -- January 19, 2012
--------------------------------------------------------
Quantization:
-------------

 * Atomic orbitals: Electrons within an atom exist in quantized energy
   levels. Qualitatively -- resonating standing waves. (We have Bohr to
   thank for this)
   + The important thing is that there is this quantization, and you can
	 choose to think of the ground/excited state of an electron as encoding
	 in binary. Or you can have a k-level system, where you have energy
	 levels 0 through k-1. These are the things we'll be thinking about
	 notationally.
   + There are other systems we can think of as a two-level system,
	 e.g. photons (in terms of polarization, e.g.)
	 - spin (very roughly magnetic moment associated with the charge)
 * These are very rough descriptions. For our purpose, you can think about
   k-level systems, where you have k discrete levels.

Superposition
-------------

The first axiom of quantum mechanics is the superposition principle. It
says that if a system can exist in one of two states, then it can also
exist in a linear superposition of said states. Likewise, if it can exist
in k states, it can also exist in a superposition of all k states (trivial
to prove)

In other words, $\alpha_1\ket{0} + \alpha_1\ket{1} + ... +
\alpha_{k-1}\ket{k-1}$. (note that $\ket{\psi}$ is called a ``ket'' (a
rough analogue of a vector): this is Dirac's bra-ket notation, which we
will use frequently this semester.)

Our $\alpha _i$ are actually probability amplitudes. These don't sum to
one; rather the magnitudes of their intensities sum to one.

In order to satisfy said property, we often must normalize. This is more or
less the same notion as normalization in statistics: the sum of the
probabilities of all possible values of a random variable must be 1.

What does this superposition principle correspond to? We talked about the
double-slit experiment. An electron/photon goes through one of two slits;
the probability of the particle going through a particular slit corresponds
directly to that state's intensity (amplitude squared).

Measurement
-----------

The second axiom of quantum mechanics is the measurement axiom. The
superposition is the private world of this system. As long as you're not
looking at it, it's going to be in this linear superposition. But as soon
as you make a measurement, the outcome of the measurement is one of these
levels $\ket{j}$ with probability $\abs{\alpha _j}^2$ (i.e. you collapse
the wave function).

So if you go back to our last example, there we have a qubit (a quantum
bit) -- a two-level system is called a quantum bit because it's a quantum
analogue of a bit. So we had an example where we had a superposition of two
states.

Attempting to detect which of the slits the particle went through actually
constitutes a measurement, which changes the state of the system: as
mentioned in the last set of notes, this corresponds to ``collapsing the
wave function'', which is more or less the notion of modifying this wave
function to just those states that are consistent with the outcome of our
measurement.

We define a standard basis measurement to be checking exactly which state
the system is in. In some sense, we are measuring in the standard basis,
i.e. whichever basis we found it most natural to use for describing our
system.

Another way of writing the state of a quantum system (as opposed to bra-ket
notation) is just saying that it is a list of $k$ complex numbers and
presenting them as a vector. This should be immediately intuitive. We still
have the same condition that the summation of $\alpha _i^2 = 1$. Our
vector, therefore, must sit on the unit k-sphere in k-space.

As mentioned earlier: this is the ket notation, invented by Dirac. The
reason we are going to be so enamored by the ket notation is that it
simultaneously expreses (1) the quantum state is a vector in a vector space
and (2) this quantum state encodes information. The fact that we are
labeling our states as $\ket{0}$ and $\ket{1}$ should be indicative in
itself that we are encoding information.

Two ways of rephrasing the probability of landing in a particular state,
therefore is 1) the length of the projection onto said basis vector and 2)
$cos^2 \theta_j$.

A Generalization of the notion of measurement: in general, when you do a
measurement, you don't need to pick the standard basis; you can pick any
orthonormal basis.

There is another useful basis called the sign basis: $\ket{+}$ and
$\ket{-}$. If placed on the unit circle, we have $\ket{+}$ located at
$\theta=\frac{\pi}{4}$ and $\ket{-}$ located at $\theta=-\frac{\pi}{4}$. In
some sense, this is a reflection about $\theta=\frac{\pi}{8}$.

Significance of sign basis
--------------------------

The standard basis is going to correspond to a certain quantity. The sign
basis will correspond to a different quantity. By analogy, let's assume
that we're measuring the position or momentum of the system depending on
which basis we're using (might as well be, what with the most famous form
of Heisenberg's uncertainty principle).

Basically, with two related quantities, the more accurately you know one,
the less accurately you can know the other.

Maximal uncertainty occurs with the conjugate basis. In this case, we find it
useful to define a measure of uncertainty, spread, as $\abs{\alpha_0} +
\abs{\alpha_1}$, and corresponds to maximum uncertainty. Uncertainty ranges
from 1 to $\sqrt{2}$.

Specifically, Heisenberg's uncertainty principle: $S(\alpha_0) + S(\beta_0)
\ge \sqrt{2}$ ($\alpha_0$, $\beta_0$ correspond to a conjugate basis).

Why do we call this a conjugate basis? Essentially, the sign and the bit
basis are conjugate bases because they form a Fourier transform pair.
