CS 191: Qubits, Quantum Mechanics and Computers
===============================================
Guest lectures: implementation of qubits
========================================
April 5, 2012
-------------
Recap: last time, we covered SG machines and the possibility of expressing
states as points on an n-sphere (by specifying n angles). Punchline:
one-to-one correspondence between states in a two-level system and points
on the 2-sphere.

One of the things we did on Tuesday was send these states through devices
that measured their states. Summarizing all we know about measurements: if
we can talk about some measurement (that corresponds to a Hermitian
operator), and we have some device that takes some unknown state
$\ket{\psi}$ and output two beams that are orthogonal (on the Bloch-sphere,
these are antipodal points); if I repeat the same measurement immediately,
then we'll get the same result.

A measurement corresponds to a Hermitian operator, and each measurement
outcome is one of the eigenvalues of that operator. Why do we consider
Hermitian operators? Diagonalizable with orthonormal eigenbasis
corresponding to real eigenvalues (i.e. spectral theorem).

What we want to do is construct a matrix to represent this measurement. We
first need some sort of matrix representation of our kets. Taking advantage
of the fact that we have Hermitian operators, some operator Q always has a
diagonalization $SDS^\dag$.

(constructing the bit flip (NOT) gate X, which was most of a problem on the
QM midterm yesterday :D)

One thing that's going to be on your homework is that $S(\hat{n})
\ket{\hat{n}}$ is going to be the matrix that returns +1 for

Pauli matrices $Z = \begin{pmatrix}1 & 0 \\ 0 & -1\end{pmatrix}$, $X =
\begin{pmatrix}0 & 1\\ 1 & 0\end{pmatrix}$, $Y = \begin{pmatrix}0 & -i\\ i
& 0 \end{pmatrix}$.

Physicists refer to these as $\sigma_x, \sigma_y, \sigma_z$. These
correspond to some way of measuring the spin. If I send some random state
through here, I can figure out the expectation value of that state using
these operators. Let's say I have some state $\hat{n}$, and I stick it
through the Z block. I'm going to get out some zeros and some ones. I
learned from experiment that the probability of getting zero is
$\frac{1}{2}(1 + \hat{n} \cdot \vec{z})$, etc.

($\vec{S} \equiv \hat{X}\ket{0} + \hat{Y}\ket{1} + \hat{Z}\ket{2}$; it's a
vector of matrices)

Expectation we can calculate in one of several ways: $\sum_i \prob{x_i}
x_i$; $\braKet{\hat{n}}{Z}{\hat{n}}$. They give the same answer, which is
encouraging.

We can start to write the (quantum) Hamiltonian of the system with
electrons in a magnetic field: $\mu B \cos\theta$. We're assuming $\mu, B$
constant. Considering the Hamiltonian to be $-\mu B\hat{Z}$, the
expectation value is certainly what we expect, so we'll go into a more
advanced case: $H = -\mu \vec{B} \cdot \vec{S}$. In physics, for an
electron, this is the Bohr magneton $-\frac{e\hbar}{2m}$, so it's
negative. NMR uses radio waves; electron spin radiance uses
microwaves. This is just due to the difference in the magneton.

This in a way corresponds to a classical description. The thing is to see
how that Hamiltonian affects states.

$H = -\mu_0 B_0 Z$. What describes time evolution of a quantum system?
Time-dependent SE. Solution is $\Psi(t) = \exp(-\frac{i}{\hbar} H t)
\ket{\Psi(0)}$. What this means is that $\ket{\Psi(t + dt)} = (1 -
\frac{i}{\hbar} H dt) \ket{\Psi}$. Taylor series tends to be a terrible way
to exponentiate matrices, since the radius of convergence is really
small. However, we get lucky because these are Hermitian matrices, so they
are diagonalizable with real eigenvalues, which is easy to do quickly.

Pauli matrices are especially nice in that they actually alternate between
themselves and the identity. This has interesting results: $e^{i\theta X} =
I\cos\theta + iX\sin\theta$; $e^{i\theta \hat{n} \cdot \vec{S}} = I \cos
theta + i(\hat{n} \cdot \vec{S})\cos\theta$. This shows up a lot since
physicists tend to pick magnetic field as Z. Originally devised by Zeeman,
so it'll often be known as the Zeeman Hamiltonian or the Zeeman effect.

The system precesses. This misbehavior is analogous to internal angular
momentum in classical mechanics.

Peculiar property of fermions (half-integer spins). Requires two
revolutions. (twists relative to the universe?) At this level, easiest to
understand as the cost of having this nice physical picture. We're really
doing rotations on complex vector spaces.

Limitation of this picture is that it's only half of the representations we
can do in the complex space.
