CS 191: Qubits, Quantum Mechanics and Computers
===============================================
Guest lectures: implementation of qubits
========================================
April 12, 2012
--------------
(notes from last time were on paper)

One last homework due next week. Will give feedback on projects after
that. 3 multi-part problems. Should not be too hard.

Review: we can do arbitrary single-qubit gates. Wrote down expressions for
doing arbitrary phase rotations. THe simplest model for two qubits
interacting with each other that feels like $H_{int} = J\sigma_z^{(1)}
\otimes \sigma_z^{(2)}$. If we were in a single qubit, we chose special
states: $\ket{0},\ket{1}$. Eigenstates of $\sigma_z$. Arbitrary
superposition of these.

When we have two qubits, we can pick a similar basis, but now our system is
composed of 2 qubits, so we need four basis states (can easily form these
by taking tensor products of our previous basis states).

effective magnetic field of the qubit is itself measured by a Pauli
operator.

If we want to build a matrix representation of an operator, we just need to
know how it acts on each of our basis states. To set up our conventions,
$\sigma_z\ket{0} = 0$; $\sigma_z\ket{1} = -\ket{1}$.

If J positive, favors antialigned (antiferromagnetic); if J negative,
favors aligned (ferromagnetic). Condensed-matter people love to study
antiferromagnetic things. End up with frustration in triangle lattice.

The way we construct the tensor product matrix is by sticking the second
matrix B onto each element of A. What I mean by that is that $A \otimes B
\equiv \begin{pmatrix}A_11 B & A_{12}B & ... \\ A_{21}B & ... & ...
\\ ... & ... & ...\end{pmatrix}$. It's worth your time to convince yourself
that this is the right way to do the tensor product. Think about how you're
writing down your basis states.

Now that we have this operator, let's think about what it does to our
system. Let's look at it strictly from the lab frame. So we're not going to
take out the Larmor precession. Write out full Hamiltonian.

$H = \mu_0 B_1 \sigma_z \tensor I - \mu_0 B_2 \sigma_z \otimes I + J
\sigma_z \otimes \sigma_z$. One thing you can do is look at the spectrum of
the Hamiltonian: the available energies (eigenvalues of Hamiltonian).

By putting an interaction on these two qubits, I've given myself some way
of doing a CNOT: a nontrivial tensor product. One thing that is important
is that these qubits are indistinguishable somehow. If I want to control
one but not the other, they need different resonance frequencies. If you're
going to pick some molecule to stick in your quantum computer, you can't
choose one with the usual symmetries. Something like plain acetylene
wouldn't really work wekk: both carbons have the same
environment. Indistinguishable. But by replacing one hydrogen by a
deuterium, we've changed the resonant frequency by just a little bit so
that our system is now resolvable.

Let's go back into a rotating frame. In a rotating frame, what we've done
is subtract out the rotating part of the hamiltonian. We can still do the
same mathematical transformation. Why? These operators commute. Two
different systems, so you can know both simultaneously. No uncertainty
relation.

Notice that the state $\ket{00}$ and $\ket{11}$ get a positive phase after
some time t, and $\ket{01}$ and $\ket{10}$ get a negative phase after some
time t. Recall that the $\pi$-pulse changes the parity of a state: it takes
an even-parity state and switches it to an odd parity state.

First is hamiltonian evolution for time $\tau$, and second, we do an X-gate
on the first qubit, and then third, we do hamiltonian evolution again for
$\tau$, and fourth, we do our X-gate again. I'll do 0 explicitly. We start
out in the state $\ket{00}$. Hamiltonian evolution (for this system) under
a time t looks like $e^{-J\tau}\ket{00}$. After the second step, we move
into the state $e^{-J\tau}\ket{10}$. After the third step, we have the
state $e^{J\tau - J\tau}\ket{10}$. And then, after the fourth step, we get
back $\ket{00}$. So by doing this series of operations, I've effectively
eliminated the effect of this hamiltonian (not ideal, but has the same net
result.)

This procedure is going to be very important to us: dipolar
decoupling. It's dipolar because you're dealing with these magnetic
dipoles, and this interaction in a sense couples these two qubits, and
you've turned this interaction off. On Tuesday, we'll talk about dynamic
decoupling, where it's basically the same procedure used to eliminate
noise.

One of the assumptions we've made is that the X-gate is fast compared to
$\tau$. It takes some time to do that X-gate, and while that's happening,
the system is evolving, and so you're accumulating some errors. Problem
with doing these X-gates fast.

Let's think of the exact sequence of controls we need to do to implement a
Bell state. So the first thing we do is the dipolar decoupling, as
discussed, so that we have the same state after some time has elapsed. Now,
we have to do a Hadamard gate: sequence of X, Y pulses that looked like
$X(\pi/2), Y(\pi/4), X(\pi/2)$. Now we want to do a CNOT by applying a
$\pi$-pulse at one of the frequencies.

This sequence of operations gives us exactly the Bell state that we wanted.

When you start building a larger quantum computer, the idle times start
becoming vital: even worse than we've discussed (Tuesday).

A lot of pulse-design for NMR revolves around faulty gates: how can I make
these errors cancel each other out?
