CS 191: Qubits, Quantum Mechanics and Computers
===============================================
Guest lectures: implementation of qubits
========================================
April 17, 2012
--------------

Last time, we talked about two-qubit gates. Today, we're going to talk
about why NMR quantum computers are not scalable and dephasing/decoherence.

So, one of the most successful demonstrations of an NMR quantum computer so
far was factoring the number 15. Used a molecule $F^{19}C^{13}$ as their
nuclear spins, and then iron, etc. In order to construct a molecule to use
it in a quantum computer, each qubit must be in a different local
environment so that the spectrometer can see a different resonant frequency
for each qubit.

Carbon exists with several different isotopes: $C^{13}$ has spin
$\frac{1}{2}$, for instance.

Carbons are easy to distinguish. Either surrounded by fluorines (very
electronegative) or irons (metals).

Also not just using one of these: fill up generously-sized sample-holder,
and you end up with ~$10^{22}$. Also important: this system is generally
analysed at room temperature. At room temperature, the effect of thermal
excitations on quantum systems is fairly large. Back-of-the-envelope way of
estimating whether you're in the ground state or not: if your energy gap is
very big compared to $\tau$, you'll likely be in the ground state. But
typically in NMR systems, the converse is true: energy gap is very small.

Density matrices
----------------
Quantum mechanics is frequently concerned with quantum probabilities
(intensities of the wave function, so to speak). These are not the only
probabilities we can consider.

Person flips a coin. If heads, gives state $\ket{\psi}$. If you're doing an
experiment and measure, what you want to do is describe what's coming out
consistently. One way: describe state as list of tuples,
e.g. [(.5 0) (.5 1)]. Not very useful. Expectation of operator A:
$\braKet{\psi}{A}{\psi}$.

trace of $\rho_A$. Density matrix: if probabilities sum up to 1, trace of
density matrix is 1.

Remember Bloch sphere: states on Bloch sphere describe quantum states. If I
have some probabilistic sum, the density matrix $\rho$ is $\sum_k p_k
\ketbra{\psi_k}{\psi_k}$. For a single qubit, I'm interested in making
measurements. The measurements I usually have access to are the Pauli
matrices (plus the identity), which form a basis for all Hermitian matrices
for two-level systems -- quaternion lie group, almost. Pauli matrices are
traceless.

Thus I can write the density matrix in terms of these quaternions. $\rho$,
then, will be $aI + b\sigma_x + c\sigma_y + d\sigma_z$. All I have to do,
now, is figure out a,b,c,d. I know that the trace of $\rho$ is 1, so a must
be $\frac{1}{2}$.

Now let's say I want to take the expectation value of $\sigma_x$. That's
equal to the trace of $\rho \sigma_x$. Working this out, we get b is
$\frac{1}{2}\avg{\sigma_x}$. The rest follows in a similar
manner. (remember that $\sigma_i\sigma_j = \sigma_k\epsilon{ijk} +
\sigma_i\delta_{ij}$)

Something else is really nice here: you know that pure states are such that
the expectations of $\sigma_x$, $\sigma_y$, $\sigma_z$ are easy to
calculate: the state is an eigenstate of $\hat{n} \cdot \vec{S}$.

We can now say something: pure states live on the Bloch sphere, while mixed
states live within the Bloch sphere.

No measurements that can distinguish between states with same density
matrix. Completely mixed state.

Decoherence
-----------
How these things evolve over time. Populations, coherences. Time evolution:
rewrite as $\int p_b \rho_b db$.

Populations and coherences: intuition is notion of coherent superposition
vs. incoherent superposition (classical prob. of up, classical prob. of
down; off-diagonal terms are 0).

Start having quantum coherences $\implies$ values showing up in
off-diagonal terms.

Magnetic field will just cause phase to go around at some rate.

Hahn (?) echo to extend coherence: only if magnetic field is not
fluctuating. Great at eliminating low-frequency noise.

In an NMR system, you tend to have inhomogeneous broadening.

Decoherence comes in two favors: both flavors are very bad. This is called
dephasing: losing the phase from the system. Typically comes with a time
scale, $t_2$. If you do this series of Hahn echos, the coherence will very
quickly decay. Remember, these magnetic fields are slightly fluctuating.

$t_2^*$ is decay that gets almost completely eliminated by Hahn echos, so
less relevant, generally.

There's another type of decoherence: suppose I set up my state in the
excited state. Could be noise that relaxes the state to the ground
state. This relaxation is given by time $t_1$. If you set up some state on
the Bloch sphere, and you don't do your complication very quickly, it'll
start to decohere.

$t_2$ is controllable. Can utilize correlations of that noise, various
techniques to mitigate its effects. Relaxation very difficult to eliminate:
what you could try is symmetrization. Can never get this echoing
behavior. Eventually, all of these states will go down to the mixed
state. Eventually all the states tend toward the zero state if there's
relaxation.

Decay of magnetization; Bloch equations. Decay in certain directions
corresponds to certain time constants. So that's about everything. Did want
to talk for a few seconds what happens when you try to scale NMR.

Because you have these thermal issues, you can't prepare the ground state
in exactly where you want. You want everything in the ground state. Because
of thermal issues, you have a probability of being in all of the
states. Make something called a pseudo-pure state. $\epsilon$ times the
ground state plus $1-\epsilon$ times the fully-mixed state. When you start
adding qubits (e.g. with 7), $\epsilon$ gets smaller. If you get 100 qubits
(molecule with 100 different spins on it) and a standard sample size,
there's 100 qubits per molecule. There's a 99.9999999% chance you have 0
molecules sitting in the ground state.

Also, the colder your system gets, that's certainly better, but you need to
push those temperatures really low, and at some point you're not doing
liquid-state NMR any more (molecules are just tumbling; dipolar coupling
between molecules balances out, very narrow lines), you're dealing with
solid-state NMR (broadening of lines). Ways of coping: magic-angle spinning
-- narrows lines a bit.

Thursday: Haffner will come back to talk a bit more about another
system. Umesh will then come back to talk about AQC and quantum crypto.
