CS 191: Qubits, Quantum Mechanics and Computers
===============================================
Guest lectures: Experimental Quantum Computing
==============================================
April 19, 2012
--------------
Professor Haffner: will speak about experimental QC. One of leading experts
in ion traps.

Specific impl. of quant. information prcessing. Idea is fueled by building
a scalable quantum processing device for whatever motivation you have. Many
approaches. What people thought 10-15 years ago: landscape has not actually
changed too much in recent years. Couple options shown to not work; most
likely will; and some have made progress.

Implementation of qubits: initialization of quantum registers, logic
operations, maintaining coherence. NMR initially very successfully, but
could be shown that this technology not scalable: exponential cost for
initialization: prob of finding particle in ground state drops
exponentially with no. of qubits because simply the prob of being in ground
state decreases.

Concentration for today: trapped ions. Mention: superconducting quantum
bits -- new, looks promising.

Picture of quantum computer. Quite complicated. Important thing: realize
that the physics is very simple, and that's what you need for quantum
processing device: very isolated, very clean. All in this vacuum chamber
(rest is just tools). Ion trap: by applying correct voltages, we can
confine single ions. trapping direction much stronger radially than
axially. Distance from each other on order of $5\mu\mathrm{m}$. These ions
are what we call quantum bits: nothing but two-level system: we forget
about all other levels. Particular excited state: chose $D_{3/2}$
(implementation detail). Transition is a two-photon transition: has two
angular momenta. Unlikely to drop (since it needs to spit out two photons),
so we have about a second for quantum processing.

We also have this p-level around. Very important in this context, since it
allows us to see the ions.

Di Vincenzo criteria:

# Scalable physical system, well-characterized qubits.

# Ability to initialize the state of the qubits

(need to set up a system)

# Long relevant coherence times, much longer than gate operation time

(require this to be quantum, and we need to be able to implement arbitrary
operations)

# Universal set of quantum gates

# Qubit-specific measurement capability

(need to be able to read it out)


No infinitely-scalable system (believed to be finite particles in
universe), so we mean mostly-scalable, i.e. not exponential to scale.

Experimental procedure: initialization in a pure quantum state. Very high
probabilities: the idea is that you exploit large differences of coherence
times. (done by shining lasers)

Quantum state manipulation: also done with lasers.

Quantum state measurement by fluorescence detection (every 10 ns I get a
photon into a $4\pi$ solid angle, etc. From a quantum mechanical view, this
is pretty interesting: prepare in s,d, and start scattering photons, and
the ion decides whether it's light or dark. Also works with multiple
ions. Instead of zero and one, I will use s and d since I am talking about
physical images.

With very high fidelity (~99.99%) we can detect this state. Essentially
limited by time it takes for the d state to the ground state. Many orders
of magnitude better than other implementations.

What we do now is initialize in ground state, shine in laser for a given
time, then read out dark or bright, then plot probability. Then you see
oscillations that correspond to the Bloch sphere, and you plot these.

How do we distinguish between $s+d$ and $s+id$? What does that mean? What
does that phase mean? I can shine in this laser and stop here. Might have
also noticed I can prepare in $s$ state; how can I prepare in $is$ state?
This problem of the phase occurs because in quantum mechanics, you must be
especially careful regarding what you can observe. Will show experiments.

So what is this phase about? For this phase, you need a phase
reference. The two phases we will have are the phase of the laser field and
the phase of the atomic polarization. Assume for now that we have a
dipole transition, not a quadrupole transition. $s$ and $p$ state. If I
look at where my electron is, I will find that in the upper part it
interferes constructively, but from the timing-dependent Schrodinger
equation, relative phase is governed by energy difference. What this means
is that you can have a minus sign, and it will be found lower.

The electron probability moves up and down with energy difference between s
and p state. Exactly the optical frequency: laser frequency. If I want to
drive transition, must apply laser matching that energy difference.

Atom with atomic polarization that goes up and down: how laser can drive
transition. Electric field shakes electron. If phase right, I can increase
this dipole moment. If phase wrong, I get destructive interference.

By switching laser phase by $\frac{\pi}{2}$, we switch from constructive to
destructive interference. By shifting the phase by this amount, we're not
putting any more energy in the system, so it's not evolving.

When I switch the phase, I am no longer rotating about the x, but now the
y.

So far we were talking about single ions. Now consider multiple ions (where
most problems show up).

change voltage by electrooptic deflector: deflects light beam based on
voltage. Neightboring ions are hardly excited. Residual excitation of cost
here since never really zero. Way to correct: apply dipolar decoupling.

Suppose you are ~1 A, and your neighboring ion is about 50 $\mu \mathrm{m}$
away. Exploiting here: ions move together. Coulombic attraction. Two
pendula coupled by a spring have normal modes. Most common is center of
mass mode where all ions move together. All have different frequencies. Can
use laser to excite these modes. Main mechanism: selectively push on one
ion with a laser.

Review of quantum mechanics of harmonic oscillators. Four levels: display
slightly differently. Combination of two-level system with harmonic
oscillator. Plot energy, label different states. Ion beam at ground
state. Electron ground state, electron excited state, etc. And then I can
apply a laser to drive this electron transition.

Think of it really as a ball being at the bottom of some harmonic
potential. Very crude approximation. Point is that we can think of this as
an abstract Hilbert space which you can connect with lasers. Same
frequency: carrier transition. In this transition, motion is not
changed. Then we can detune the laser; we have energy conservation at
particular energies.

Blue side-bands, since blue-shifted, etc. Frequency multiplied by
$\hbar$. When you scan the laser frequency, you can see some
excitations. There are other excitation probabilities. Three harmonic
oscillators, since we're working with three dimensions. Radial modes,
radial minus axial modes, etc. Can also do transitions where excitation of
state destroys a photon. Raising and lowering operators.

e.g. radial production of phonons, axial destruction of phonons.

What we can do, for instance, is increase motion in one direction while
decreasing it in another direction.

You learn things like dipole-forbidden. It's really a quadrupole
transition, suppressed by $\alpha^2$. Gives the difference of 10ns
vs. 1s. Don't worry about details.

We looked already at this exciting the electronic transition. Can also tune
laser to sideband, and see more Rabi oscillations with Rabi frequencies:
Reduced by $\eta = kx_0$ Lamb-Dicke parameter. Can calculate; actually
probably would take an hour as well.

Let us now create some Bell states. See how we can use this toolbox to
create Bell states. Take two ions prepared in s state, but also
laser-cooled center of mass to ground state. Doppler effect. What we do now
is three pulses: first a pulse onto right ion for a length $\pi$ on the
carrier transition, i.e. flip state but not motion. Now, go with laser to
other ion and apply a blue side-band pulse for length $\frac{\pi}{2}$. And
now we have the last pulse, which will somehow create the bell
state. Tuning our laser to the right ion and applying a $\pi$-pulse. What's
happening is we go to the s state and remove a photon excitation. We
de-excite the motion (which was common to both ions). The original part of
this superposition, which was left around, won't happen: no state with
correct energy.

If we have zero excitations in our quantum oscillator, then we can't take
out an excitation. We can separate out the motion, and what we left with is
sd + ds. Remember: we're talking only about the center-of-mass
motion. Normal mode spans the full space of the two ions moving.

Bell-states with atoms: NIST: beryllium, fidelity of 97%; Innsbruck:
calcium, fidelity of 99%, etc.

We all know that there is an infinite number of Bell states, which have
some phase incorporated. Need to play around with the length of the
$\frac{\pi}{2}$ pulse. Must show coherence: interference with each
other. Plus sign makes sense. Not sometimes plus, sometimes minus. We want
to also know relative phase of the superposition.

What we do is develop a method to measure the density matrix. A measurement
yields the z-component of the Bloch vector. Measuring diagonal of the
density matrix is straightforward: enter measured values into this
diagonal. So how, then, are you going to measure these off-diagonal
elements, which determine the phase of this coherence?

How do I, say, measure the projection onto the y-axis? Rotate about x-axis
(apply $\frac{\pi}{2}$-pulse). Enter value here, then prepare same state
again. Do the same with projection onto x-axis.

Now we need to generalize to 2 qubits. Must try all combinations. Need to
do x,y rotations, nothing to first, nothing to second. etc. Analysis, some
linear algebra. Then we come up with the density matrices.

These are actually all measurements. You can even go to more complex
states: largest: 16 zero-qubits + 16 up-qubits. Huge matrix.

W state, etc.

Want to now show some nice things about quantum mechanics: can now prepare
these states, and can now measure individual qubits. Suppose we measure the
red qubit here in the center. Projection onto a self-consistent space.

problems with Hilbert spaces. One more qubit would have increased analysis
time by a factor of 24.

In the last 20 minutes, we've talked only about generation of bell
states. Not yet a quantum state. Original proposal to do controlled-not,
Cirac-Zoller, geometric phase, Malmer-Sorensen gate.

We use a little more complicated mechanism, which is harder to
understand. What we want to do is manipulate our two ions in this
manifold. Put all states. Drive two photon transitions: to move from SD to
DS. Do this by detuning laser from excited state. Equivalent paths:
constructive interference. When you analyze this carefully, you can see
this is a two-qubit universal gate.

Don't need to address ions: automatically implements a gate. Experimentally
easier: higher fidelity, etc.

Analysis of coherence. Applying two single-qubit gates to two ions:
contrast of interference fringes goes up to 1: high-fidelity bell state, so
gate works exceedingly well. One case: gate duration of 51 $\mu
\mathrm{s}$, average fidelity of 99.3(2)%.

Talk about errors. In theory, the fidelity would be sufficient.

Parity + when equal, parity - when unequal, etc. Such an interference
pattern predicted. If not happening, interference fringes have less
contrast. Fidelity decreases as we apply more gates.

Even after 21 equivalent gates, still 8% fidelity.

Scaling of this approach?

Problems:

* Coupling strength between internal and motional states of a N-ion string
  decreases as $\eta \propto \frac{1}{\sqrt{N}$ (reasoning: if you excite
  one ion, a single photon needs to excite the whole ion chain; a single
  photon gets absorbed by the whole ion chain. More difficult for single
  photon to kick entire chain if chain is big), but problem does not scale
  exponentially. From a math point, we are fine (no exponential
  resources).
  
* More vibrational modes increase risk of spurious excitation of unwanted
  nodes.

* Distance between neighbouring ions decreases $\implies$ addressing more
  difficult.

So we need to divide: idea behind using segmented traps.

One problem is complexity. Everything can fail. Suppose one component fails
with error 0.1%, with 10000 components, this will never work.

In some sense the ENIAC looks similar in complexity. What we have done to
make things better was to put a box about it: probability of misalignment
gets worse.

We need to divide the system into smaller pieces: where most (if not all)
of effort of ion-trapping goes at the moment. This is an idea which
actually comes from Leibfried and Wineland, who envisioned many ions
trapped in some structure, and voltages moving ions around. Advantage:
small ion string.

Can show that within 50us we can move ions on the order of a millimeter,
which is huge. Shown on time scales, which are comparable to gate times, so
not too expensive.

Experiment, for instance: sketch of ion trap. What they have done is move
ions between points, and what they have shown is coherence (Ramsey fringes
on a single ion). When they transported, the contrast is approximately the
same. This tells us that the quantum information is not lost during
transport.

Another development is to make the traps easier. People are interested in
using conventional lithography to build easier traps. Recent development:
surface traps. All on one surface; can use microfab techs. Can basically
analyse electrostatics, and ions trapped on such a surface.

That is basically where the experiments are. People are building these
devices and trying to control them. Main challenge. Once we can control
these, we have real scalable quantum processing.

If you want to read about these things, you can look in this review which
is written in a way with hardly any math.

Review on "quantum computing with trapped ions"
http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/0809.4368

most recent progress: NIST, Boulder
http://www.nist.gov/pml/div688/grp10/quantum-logic-and-coherent-control.cfm

Innsbruck
http://wwww.quantumoptics.at/

University of Maryland
http://www.iontrap.umd.edu/publications/recent_pubs.html

Basic ideas of how this works, physics is fairly clear: quantum mechanics at its best.
