CS 191: Qubits, Quantum Mechanics and Computers
===============================================
Quantum Cryptography
====================
April 24, 2012
--------------

Today we will speak about quantum cryptography. The main question: how to
agree on a secret key? Alice & Bob sitting at distance, can communicate
over insecure channel. Want to agree on shared random key. Often running,
can use private-key crypto, do whatever they want. Getting started, they
want to exchange this private key.

The problem is that Eve is listening on the line. So how do they accomplish
this? Here's the setup: there's a quantum channel which they share. Alice
can send qubits to Bob. They also share a classical channel, except that
they have no control over the classical channel. All they know is that it's
authenticated (public-key signing, perhaps).

Eve also has access to the quantum channel. What we want to do is develop
this protocol: sharing of the random key without loss of confidentiality.

So what happens in classical cryptography? RSA (public key
crypto). Everything we're speaking about today is working under the
assumption that A&B haven't met yet and are only now establishing this
private key.

Why do we need quantum cryptography? Shor's breaks RSA. What we are trying
to achieve is unconditional security -- the only thing you need to assume
in order to guarantee security is that the laws of physics hold (i.e. QM is
an accurate model). Has been implemented using today's cryptography.

What we will talk about today are the principles of quantum crypto.

Qubits used here are polarizations of photons. Polarization as orientation
of light wave as it propagates. In some direction orthogonal to direction
of propagation. Polarization is a qubit. Nice thing: polarizing filter
blocks photons whose polarization is perpendicular to the orientation of
the filter and transmits photons whose polarization is aligned with the
orientation of the filter. It gives us a measurement axis for the photon.

The probability that the photon is transmitted by the second filter is
$\cos^2\theta$. Measurement of the qubit.

What we are saying is that we could write our qubit state $\ket{\psi}
\equiv \alpha\ket{0} + \beta\ket{1}$. Zero vertically-polarized, one
horizontally-polarized. One part of superposition goes through, other part
blocked. Self-consistency. We could also write this in some other basis
$\ket{u}, \ket{u_\perp}$ at some angle $\theta$.

This is really qubits in the same language that we had, except we're
thinking about them as spatially-oriented, just as we thought about
spin. Completely analogous.

So here's what we're planning to do. Two ways to encode a bit of
information. Could either encode in rectilinear (vert/horiz) or in diagonal
(+,-). So when Alice wants to transmit a bit to Bob, if she was using the
rectilinear basis, she'd transmit horizontally/vertically polarized
photons. Bob would then use either a vertical or horizontal filter. Similar
concept with a diagonal polarization.

Remember: all channels are visible to everyone.

Why use both these polarizations? Has to do with uncertainty principle:
these are Fourier transform pairs, so maximally uncertain. You'll recall we
did this in the second or third lecture. We talked about the bit and sign
bases. There's an uncertainty principle between the two. You have a choice
of measurement basis (could be one, could be other, could be a mix) to
determine how much information you get. You cannot get perfect information
about the state of said qubit.

Eve, who doesn't know which basis the information is being sent in, really
cannot figure out both. If Eve tries to measure in the wrong basis, then
she completely destroys the information.

thought regarding decision of which basis to choose: send a bell
state. Confirmation would be on this classical line, just saying "I got &
measured the bell state"

Implementation is actually done without bell states. Very difficult to
implement bell states.

Let's suppose Eve entangled the transmitted qubit with one of her
own. By doing so, she's randomized the state.

The BB84 protocol (that we're going to discuss) was invented in 1984 but was
not proven correct until about a decade ago. People assumed
correctness. Reason: subtle. All other attacks you could think of, but they
don't work. But how do you show that no attack will work?

How do we make use of this scenario? How do we distinguish between Bob and Eve?

Repeat 4N times (if we want to end up with N random bits):

Choose random bit, randomly select basis. Announce choices of
bases. Discard if choices different. Eve can see all of this.

Final result: roughly 2N shared bits. Select N random positions, confirm
that they're the same. Remaining N bits are secret key.

Ensures confidentiality of message. Integrity of key is guaranteed by
communications on classical channel.

Potential corruption of shared key (attack on integrity): Eve just needs to
corrupt one bit. 50% chance of catching this. Refine: more sophisticated
protocol.

Beautiful way of dealing with this, provable correctness.

Single-photon generators imperfect. Occasionally emit two photons. Eve can
intercept one, let the other go, and that breaks the scheme (known vector
of attack).

Polarization over these distances? This is the interesting thing about
photons. If you transmit a photon, there is almost nothing that decoheres
it. Can maintain coherence over long period and long distance. Can transmit
through optical fiber, and it will maintain its polarization for something
like 60 - 70 km.

Issue is why 60-70 km? Because signal gets attenuated. Every so often, you
have to amplify the signal, but of course we don't want to amplify the
signal; we just want to transmit it. Usually involves measurement and
retransmission.

People are trying to build amplifiers that don't do that: small quantum
computers that take the photon, error-correct, and retransmit. But not
implemented yet.

Security of BB84: Since Eve does not know the correct orientation, she
cannot measure the polarization without disturbing it.

Proof of unconditional security based on axioms of QM is difficult and
dates back to about 2000.

Practical considerations:

* imperfect measurements: channel noise causes shared btis to not agree.
  + Figure out noise rate, determine whether acceptable.
  + In this case, Alice and Bob exchange parity bits to correct mismatches.
* Can only guarantee that Eve does not know too many bits out of the
  remaining N.

Randomness distillation. Suppose we are left with 4 bits, and we know the
noise rate is at most a quarter, so Eve knows at most one of these
bits. Want to distill into bits Eve does not know about. Extract key via
XORs. Claim: no matter which bit Eve knows, each bit looks completely
random to Eve.

Choose random hash function to hash these bits. What we can prove is that
Eve has no information regarding the resulting hash. Must deal with these
issues: mismatches and Eve's knowledge.

Turns out that hash function itself doesn't have to be random. Should work
even if hash function is public (and surjective?).

Actual theorem: suppose you pick a hash function H at random, and now let's
say that $N \mapsto M$ (n-bit strings to m-bit strings), and that x is
chosen according to some distribution.

Lemma: left-over hash lemma. If you look at the pair H (specified somehow,
chosen at random), H(x) (m-bit string; H(x) is some string), the claim is
that this distribution is close to the uniform distribution on m-bit
strings, and so you cannot tell the difference between this result and some
random m-bit string.

Has been implemented. Was famous experiment done at a lake near
Geneva. Three locations with optical fiber going between these
locations.

Challenges with atmospheric photon transmission and detection. Background
photons, daylight radiance, night radiance. How to distinguish? Start:
timing pulse -- expect a photon in 1 us, within a window of 1 ns. What can
we control? Narrowness of window of time; part of spectrum which sunlight
that does not use (or least-used), and a very narrow window of frequency,
at that; look at very small solid angle. So we're isolating in terms of
position, momentum, and time. Once you do all of these things you realize
that you can cut down this $10^{13}$ to something very tiny.

So why use photons? Why not use some particle with very strong coherence?
Photons are nice -- very stable, coherent. So what would this other
particle be?

Must take into account GR. Photon essentially does not interfere with
anything else. Remember how hard it is to do cavity QED. To take a photon
and create a gate using said photon is very difficult to do. You put the
photon in a cavity and couple the qubit to the cavity and the cavity to
some other qubit. Outside of these extraordinary efforts, photons are
fairly stable.

Other considerations for photon transmission: efficient lasers (want some
source such that exactly one photon can be transmitted). Already that is
enough to get this off the ground.

Exaamples of 10 km QKD. Commercially available quantum crypto systems.

And then there's this fact. You can prove that these things are secure, but
they aren't really: one possible attack: shine strong laser at Alice; can
figure out internal settings.

Device-independent cryptography. Want to prove quantum crypto scheme secure
based purely on quantum mechanics. What is interesting is that you can show
that in principle, you can create some systems. Theoretically possible to
do.

Quantum key distribution, then use classical private key cryptography,
i.e. schemes secure under quantum cryptography (not known to be broken; no
proximal reason why those would be breakable, given the quantum algorithms
we know).

Two things: course projects. Some of you have sent email giving 2-3
paragraphs describing what you'll be doing and what sources. What would be
good would be if the rest of you could send something hopefully by later
today.

Project presentations: next week Thursday. Will set up in location to be
determined (hopefully here). Will go from 9:30 to 1, perhaps. Go through
all project presentations. Make sure you have a good typed presentation
that fits into ~20 min. With questions, presumably no presentations will go
over 25 min.

Roughly 10 groups. Will try to arrange for pizza -- at some point we'll
break for lunch.

What day will the paper be due? The paper will be due the end of the
following week (end of finals week).

Let's say that there might not be a breakdown in the sense that if you do
particularly well in one, it'll compensate for the other.

Two other issues: 1) there's a question for EECS majors: what should this
course count as? Science requirement? EECS requirement? 50/50? Would be a
useful thing to sort out. Would like to take existing notes for this class
and make them more consistent with what was taught this semester. Two
things: if you've been taking good notes in class, I'd love to have a copy
of those.
