CS 191: Qubits, Quantum Mechanics and Computers
===============================================
Quantum Walks and the Dirac Equation
====================================
April 26, 2012
--------------
Last lecture of the semester. Talk about two things: start with quantum
walks and Dirac equation, and then I'll tell you a little about other
topics in quantum computation you might be interested in. Larger picture,
who, how to pursue.

Before we start, let's review something about classical mechanics. Suppose
we are doing a random walk on a discretized line, so we have grid
points. At each step, we move randomly. How long to reach a distance $n$?

You may recognize this: after k steps, this is given by a binomial
distribution centered at zero, and the standard deviation is about
$\sqrt{k}$: central limit theorem. We can work this out: if you look at the
position after $k$ steps, we have some distribution. We want to know what
the variance of this distribution is, and thus what the standard deviation
is. Turns out that the variance grows as $k$, and so the standard deviation
grows as $\sqrt{k}$. Since each step is a random variable (independent from
all other steps), we can exploit linearity of expectation to find this $k$.

Thus if we want to reach this distance safely, we should expect to walk
roughly $n^2$ steps. That is the penalty for randomness: a factor of $n^2$.

Now assume that instead of dealing with a classical particle and a
classical walk, we're dealing with a quantum particle.

In the classical case, the position is $x$, which is an integer; there is a
coin flip $b$, which is $-1 \lor 1$, and at each step, you flip the coin
and increment $x$ by $b$.

In the quantum case, we again have $x$s and $b$, but now we're keeping
track of everything. The state includes both $x$ and $b$. Whatever the coin
flip says, we move accordingly. And now we must flip the coin. How to flip
the coin, since it's now a quantum bit? Apply the Hadamard to it. That is
our quantum walk on the line.

Now, we could do the same thing, start from the origin, walk for $k$ steps,
and how far do we get? When you do this quantum walk, you end up with most
of the mass at some constant multiplied by $k$: it really walks at constant
rate. Why?

What accounts for the chance at origin being roughly zero in the quantum
case?

We must go back to the classical case and understand this. There are many
ways to return to the origin, but in the quantum case, each way comes with
a phase, and these phases tend to cancel out. When you shoot out to the
ends, you get constructive interference, whereas at the origin, you get
destructive interference.

Qualitatively, the quantum walk behaves very differently from the classical
walk. Remember: in quantum mechanics, you don't have a notion of a
trajectory.

You can also define a continuous version of that by defining an appropriate
Hamiltonian. The Hamiltonian you would need is exactly what you think: it's
the Pauli matrix $\sigma_x$. We'll see how to write this behavior
explicitly in a bit: this will result in the Dirac equation.

So now, let's see how to apply some of these ideas about quantum
walks. What are these useful for? Algorithms. This relates to a quadratic
speedup in the simple case. Tells you if you were using random walks to
design an algorithm, if you switched over to quantum, you'd get quadratic
speedup. You do get quadratic speedup or much speedup for most of these.

What's interesting is a quantum algorithm for formula evaluation: quadratic
speedup for evaluating a boolean expression.

Applications: minmax tree where values are zero and one. And is min, Or is
max.

This finds its use in quantum algorithms and other places. What I want to
talk about today is Dirac's equation, which can be explained nicely with
quantum walks.

This was when he was reconciling quantum mechanics with special relativity,
which also led him to the role of spin and the relativistic origins of
spin. Also led him to his discovery of antimatter. This was really quite a
remarkable event in physics, and what was interesting was that also, in all
this was just how much courage Dirac had in terms of looking at this
problem, finding this very simple equation, and having the courage to stand
by something so new that had so many major consequences.

So let's go back: we have a particle whose energy is classically
$\frac{p^2}{2m}$. Quantumly, this is $\frac{\hat{p}^2}{2m}$, where $\hat{p}
\equiv \frac{\hbar}{i}\nabla$. So now, let's try to understand
relativistically that the energy is given by the Klein-Gordon equation
(Einstein's theory of relativity, really, which arises from invariances of
moving frames), which says that $E^2 = p^2c^2 + m^2c^4$ (where $c$ is speed
of light), and $p^2c^2$ is the kinetic form.

If you try to figure out what this is saying, when a particle has speed
much less than that of the speed of light, you can pull out $mc^2$, and you
get $mc^2\sqrt{1 + \frac{p^2}{m^2c^2}}$. Since this is small, you can
approximate this as $mc^2(1 + \frac{p}{2mc^2})$ (first-order Taylor
expansion with respect to p). Expanding this, we get $mc^2$ (energy
associated with rest mass) added to $\frac{p^2}{2m}$. And that's exactly
what you want: that is the total energy.

So all is fine and well, and now, what Dirac was trying to do was figure
out what the corresponding quantum equation is: $H^2 = \hat{p^2}c^2 + m^2
c^4 I$ (where $I$ is the identity). This is the square of the
Hamiltonian. How do you compute the Hamiltonian itself? This is exactly
what Dirac was trying to do: he was trying to compute the square root of
this operator. Youc an try to compute square roots, use Taylor series, it
blows up, and it doesn't really look like anything. And then he had this
insight.

Let's use units where $c=1$. What we're trying to do is compute $H =
\sqrt{p^2 + m^2 I}$, where both of these are operators. Here was the flash
of insight: what he realized was if you wrote the Hamiltonian by doubling
the dimension as $\begin{pmatrix}\hat{p} & mI \\ mI &
-\hat{p}\end{pmatrix}$. So what happens when you square this? We get
$\begin{pmatrix}\hat{p}^2 + mI & 0 \\ 0 & \hat{p}^2 + mI \end{pmatrix}$.

Has this feel about it that in trying to solve this especially difficult
problem, and by stepping outside of what seem to be the rules of the game,
it suddenly becomes very simple. And then instead of saying this is
illegal, perhaps these actually are the correct rules of the game.

And so what Dirac said was that there's an extra degree of freedom: it's a
qubit -- spin. So now we can try to understand what this tells us about how
the particle moves relativistically. If we write that out, we want to solve
$i\pderiv{\Psi}{t} = H \Psi$. Let's do case 1: $m = 0$.

So what's our state space? There's the position of the particle, and then
there's spin. The Hamiltonian is going to act on the whole thing. What will
this look like? In general, it's acting on the two spaces together. If you
were to write out the state vector, it consists of the component with spin
$b=0$ and the component with spin $b=1$.

With the massless particle, $\pderiv{\psi}{t} = -\nabla\psi$, so in the
one-dimensional case, $\psi$ is moving right with the speed of light. So
there are two solutions, depending on your spin qubit: in one case, you're
moving right at the speed of light, and in the other case, you're moving
left with the speed of light.

So what happens in general? You have this term that corresponds to motion
left or right at the speed of light, and then you have the term that
corresponds to the mass. The greater the mass, the more often you flip the
coin. The presence of the mass term corresponds to a new direction after
each coin flip, so to speak. Recall that we moved $ak$ for some $a$. With
no mass, $a$ is $c$. As we increase the mass, $a$ decreases.

There's another thing you might think about: in the classical case, after k
steps, you move $\sqrt{k}$. You can move one step per unit time right or
left. But of course we want to let that unit tend to zero, so $k$ tends to
infinity.

In fact, what Dirac did was work out this problem, and he worked out the
statistics of this walk. He didn't call it a quantum walk, but that's what
he implicitly did.

So that's it regarding quantum walks and the Dirac equation. I'll now spend
the next ten minutes talking how to further pursue quantum computing. If
you have specific questions, feel free to ask.

There are many different areas here in quantum computing, which is
partitioned into three primary flavors of research: theory work -- consists
of quantum algorithms (design), complexity theory (QBP = P?), information,
crypto. The boundaries will vary depending on your source.

Quantum information theory: quantum analog of classical information theory:
how much classical information can I transmit in each qubit? What's the
value of quantum information? And the second part: error correction and
fault-tolerance. If you want to build a quantum computer, one thing you
have to worry about is decoherence. Previously people thought that quantum
states were not protectable: they degrade over time as the environment
decoheres them. This is a way of putting this quantum information inside a
sort of error-correcting envelope for protection. Even after being subject
to errors, we can still recover the original message (a quantum state).

Physically, you think about these errors as heating of the system (increase
of entropy). What do you do? Take fresh qubits all initialized to zeros
(supercooled), and do heat exchange. Take all the heat (in the form of
errors), isolate it, and push it into these cold qubits. Now these errors
are sitting inside these new qubits, which we can then discard --
refrigeration. If you do that, that's called fault-tolerance.

Cryptography we know about. There's one subject I haven't talked about:
post-quantum cryptography. Quantum algorithms break most of modern crypto:
RSA, Diffie-Hellman, you name it. What we'd like to do is restore
public-key cryptography, and eventually use private-key cryptography. You
could use quantum cryptography, but even though there are existing systems,
they're very difficult to use.

There's a different way out: how about designing public-key cryptosystems
which quantum computers cannot break?  Very active field of research. If
you think about it, this may be the biggest practical impact of quantum
computation in the very near future (next few years). Would be very
interesting if that happens; it's not the quantum computers that would have
the impact, but rather the threat of quantum computers.

Two other fields are simulating quantum systems: the starting point for
quantum computation, to simulate this, we normally would need an
exponential amount of work to simulate. So how would you simulate quantum
systems efficiently on a quantucm computer? There are interesting results
here: how would you, for instance, run the quantum metropolis algorithm?
The second question: how to simulate on a classical computer. Here, the
question is not how to simulate general systems, but rather, could it be
that natural quantum systems are somehow much simpler and can be simulated
very efficiently, even if they are highly-entangled? There is a renaissance
of information in this field.

Special systems can be solved explicitly (closed-form). Those can be
simulated on a classical computer. There are many others that can't be
solved explicitly, but they have certain properties that we can take
advantage of.

And finally, there is a lot of work on experimental quantum
computing. Various techniques.

In terms of resources: Haffner teaches a course on quantum computing from a
more experimental viewpoint. In terms of the physics department, there's
Haffner, Clark (superconducting qubits), Stamper-Kurn (Bose-Einstein
condensates, optical systems), Szdiki, Crommie. In the chemistry
department, there's Waley, who might teach this course next year. There's
also a colleague in computer science: Kubiatowicz -- quantum architecture.

How to put together? Let's say that three years from now, ion traps work
and scale to a few hundred qubits. Now how would you put them together to
do interesting computations? What are the architectural tradeoffs: should
you keep qubits close or teleport, how to manage ECC, etc.

Few places other than Berkeley; Waterloo (IQC, perimeter institute),
Caltech, MIT, U. Maryland -- growing group, CQT in Singapore (which
actually offers a degree in QC). Number of resources. And then there are
groups in Europe which are very strong: Munich, Germany, Paris. There are
lots of resources internationally, but also there are plenty of
opportunities for summer schools if interested or graduate work in the
area.

If you want any more information, you can email or stop by.
