CS 191: Qubits, Quantum Mechanics and Computers
===============================================
Multiple-qubit Systems -- January 24, 2012
------------------------------------------

State of a single qubit is a superposition of various states
($\cos\theta\ket{0} + \sin\theta\ket{1}$). measurement has effect of
collapsing the superposition.

Consider the hydrogen atom: electron can be in ground state or excited state.

Now we study two-qubit systems.

TWO QUBITS
==========

Now you have two such particles, and we want to describe their joint state,
what that state looks like. Classically, this can be one of four states. So
quantumly, it is in a superposition of these four states. Our $\ket{\psi}$,
then, is $\alpha_{00}\ket{00} + \alpha_{01}\ket{01} + \alpha_{10}\ket{10} +
\alpha_{11}\ket{11}$.  Collapse of the wave function occurs in exactly the
same manner.

Probability first qubit is 0: $\abs{\alpha_{00}}^2 + \abs{\alpha_{01}}
^2$. New state is a renormalization of the remaining states.

ENTANGLEMENT
============

What it means for two qubits to not be entangled, essentially, is to have
conditional independence: the result of measuring of one qubit does not
affect the state of the other.

Quantum mechanics tells us that this is a very rare event (i.e. it
almost never happens).

Bell State
----------

Suppose you have two qubits in the state $\frac{1}{\sqrt{2}}
\parens{\ket{00} + \ket{11}}$. Impossible to factor (entanglement
corresponds to the notion of a nontrivial tensor product), so we must have
some sort of dependence occurring. Neither of the two qubits has a definite
state. All you can say is that the two qubits together are in a certain
state.

Our Bell states are $\ket{00} \pm \ket{11}$, $\ket{01} \pm \ket{10}$ (up to
a factor of $\frac{1}{\sqrt{2}}$, which is just our normalization).

Rotational invariants of Bell states -- maximally entangled in all
orthogonal bases.
