CS 191: Qubits, Quantum Mechanics and Computers
===============================================
Entanglement, EPR, Bell's Experiment -- January 26, 2012
--------------------------------------------------------

Entanglement
============

Last time, we saw a Bell state (a Bell basis state). This is a state
of two particles (i.e. two qubits), and the state of each of the
qubits is "entangled", so to speak, with the other of the qubits.

This state has a very curious property, as we saw last time: maximally
entangled qubits will remain maximally entangled regardless of the choice
of bases, as long as they are orthogonal. This is known as the **rotational
invariance of Bell states**.

For the Bell basis state $\alpha_{00}\ket{00} + \alpha_{11}\ket{11}$, we
have rotational invariance for _real_ rotations only. Certain Bell bases
additionally have rotational invariance over complex rotations.

FACT 1:
-------

You get the same outcome if you measure both in the $v$, $v_\perp$
basis.

FACT 2:
-------

Independent of separation between particles. It's not because the particles
are close to each other and talking to each other; it's because of their
state.

Einsten, Podolsky, & Rosen '35:
-------------------------------

Imagine that you have a pair of particles that are emitted (e.g. electron,
positron) that are highly entangled. They are emitted in opposite
directions and travel far from each other. And then you measure Particle 1
in bit (0/1) basis ⇒ knowledge of the bit on the other particle. Also,
measure Particle 2 in the sign basis ⇒ knowledge of the sign on the first
particle. Contradicts uncertainty principle?

Not at all. { sign information destroyed, etc. } Sign information measured
in the second particle has nothing to do with that of the first particle,
since measuring the bit information destroyed the sign information (i.e. is
now entirely unknown). { more questions regarding the
Einstein/deterministic interpretation of quantum mechanics. }

Bell '64:
---------

Take two entangled particles. Despite large separation distance, they are
quantumly connected. What you can do is start playing with the notion of
measuring the particles in arbitrary bases.

Make one measurement with outcome u. You'd have $\ket{v}$ and $\ket{
v_\perp}$ with probabilities $\cos^2\theta$ and $\sin^2 \theta$.

Bell's idea was this: Surely, if you play with your choice of $u$ and $v$,
you're going to get something good.

We have some input, 0 or 1, that tells us which basis to pick. Suppose
there are two experimentalists who have these entangled pairs of qubits. At
the last minute, Alice gets as input some random bit; likewise, Bob gets
some other random bit.

We want to know the two output bits.

Goal: maximize probability that $r{a}r{b} = a + b (mod 2) = a \oplus b$

If either of the inputs is a zero, they want to output the same
bit. But if both of the inputs are one, they want to output
opposite bits.

Fact: If you choose the correct angles, in the quantum world, you get a
success probability of $\cos^2\parens{\frac{\pi}{8}} \approx 0.8$.

Claim: no way to do better than $\frac{3}{4}$, if you agree to say the same
thing in advance. (Local) hidden variable theory $\le 0.75$. Impossible to
do better.

However: quantum mechanics gives us a success rate of $\approx 0.853$, or
$\cos^2\parens{\frac{\pi}{8}}$.

Alice's protocol is as follows: if $r_a = 0$, measure in basis rotated
clockwise $\frac{\pi}{16}$. If $r_a = 1$, measure in basis rotated
counterclockwise $\frac{3\pi}{16}$.

Bob protocol is as follows: if $r_b = 0$, measure in basis rotated
counterclockwise $\frac{\pi}{16}$. If $r_b = 1$, measure in basis rotated
clockwise $\frac{3\pi}{16}$.

Where did these angles come from? If you plot them on the number line, you
get four points $a_1, b_0, a_0, b_1$. When either is zero, we have a
distance of $\frac{\pi}{8}$, else we have a distance of $\frac{3\pi}{8}$.

For the cases where $a \oplus b = 1$, we have probability $\cos^2\parens{
\frac{\pi}{8}}$. for the case where $a \oplus b = 0$, we have probability
$\sin^2\parens{\frac{3\pi}{8}} = \cos^2\parens{\frac{\pi}{8}}$.

This conclusively disproves Einstein's hidden-variable theory.

There's this remarkable aspect where over time you can refine these
concepts to the point that we can sit down in an hour and a half to
understand these concepts that Einstein would have given anything to
understand. Isn't this remarkable?

When you actually do these experiments, they turn out to refute the
entire plan Einstein had.
