CS 191: Qubits, Quantum Mechanics and Computers
===============================================
Quantum Gates -- January 31, 2012
---------------------------------

(I missed this lecture, but I'll give what I can only imagine was covered)

One of the most popular models of quantum computing is the circuit model. A
quantum circuit is an arrangement of quantum ``gates'', which are an
abstraction for an underlying mechanism to control the evolution of the
system. As in classical computing where we have AND/OR/NOT gates, in
quantum computing, we have this notion of a universal set of gates. Such a
universal set is theoretically impossible to construct, since we have
uncountably infinite rotations, but we can get arbitrarily close as per the
Kitaev-Solovay theorem (we won't discuss this much in this class).

Let us start with the Hadamard gate (H). It is essentially the
change-of-basis matrix that moves us between the bit and sign bases. Note
that we only need this one matrix, since it happens to be its own inverse.

$$H = \frac{1}{\sqrt{2}}\begin{pmatrix}1 & 1 \\ 1 & -1\end{pmatrix}$$

From the Pauli spin matrices, we can write down a few more gates:

$$X = \begin{pmatrix}0 & 1 \\ 1 & 0\ond{pmatrix}, Z = \begin{pmatrix}1 & 0
\\ 0 & -1\end{pmatrix}$$

Note that these correspond to $\sigma_x$ and $\sigma_z$, and are thus also
their own inverses. Those familiar with boolean logic will note that $X$
has the I/O characteristics of the NOT gate. Because of their effect on
single qubit systems, we refer to these two gates as the bit- and
phase-flip gates.

The final gate we have is a two-qubit gate, the controlled NOT gate, known
as "CNOT" or $C_X$. The first input (the control) flips the second input
(the target) if and only if its value is 1.

This particular gate is much more powerful than it initially seems. From an
I/O perspective, this seems to be just the identity on the first qubit and
an XOR on the second qubit. An important property of quantum circuits is
reversibility, down to the gate level. What this means is that each circuit
represents a bijection (injective and surjective mapping) of $k$-qubit
states (where $k$ is the size of the input). Indeed, this property arises
from the unitary evolution of the wave function.

It turns out that CNOT is related to entangling/disentangling of Bell
states: suppose we have two qubits both in the ground state $\ket{0}$, so
our system is $\ket{0} \otimes \ket{0} = \ket{00}$. If we apply the
Hadamard to the first qubit, we have the uniform superposition $\ket{+}
\otimes \ket{0} = \frac{1}{\sqrt{2}}\parens{\ket{0} + \ket{1}} \otimes
\ket{0} = \frac{1}{\sqrt{2}}\parens{\ket{00} + \ket{10}}$. If we then apply
the CNOT with the first qubit as the control, we end up in the Bell state
$\frac{1}{\sqrt{2}} \parens{\ket{00} + \ket{11}}$.

Similarly, if we apply the CNOT to this same Bell state, the control
remains in the uniform superposition, while the target is forced into the
ground state. As a result, we observe the conditional independence that
corresponds to disentangled states (i.e. we can factor the tensor product).

An interesting point is that given one of the Bell states, we can create
any of the other elementary Bell states by applying a phase flip, bit
flip, or both.

So far all of these gates correspond to unitary evolution of the
system. That is all and well, but in order to obtain any information, we
must make a measurement, which, as we have mentioned earlier, collapses the
wave function.

(note: we represent a measurement with the symbol $\angle$)

(TODO: figure out some way to insert circuits)
