CS 191: Qubits, Quantum Mechanics and Computers
===============================================
Revisiting Axioms of Quantum Mechanics -- Feb 2, 2012
-----------------------------------------------------

We're going to be revisiting, over the next few lectures, the axioms
of quantum mechanics and how to refine them further.

Today: first axiom: superposition principle. In general, if we're in a
system that has k distinguishable states, then in general it is in a
linear superposition of these states. Each state is a unit vector, and
the states of the system reside on the surface of the sphere.

Addendum:
=========

What happens if we have two different subsystems? Take the first to be
k-dimensional, and the second to be l-dimensional. So now, in the
addendum, the question we are asking is "what happens if we take these
two subsystems and put them together and call this our new system?"
Take a tensor product of these two states. k × l distinguishable states.

So now, if you apply our superposition principle, what does it tell
us? We can be in any superposition of states. We are in a
superposition of basis vectors of (k ⊗ l).

Separately, we have k + l amount of storage space, but when we put
them together, we have k × l. These are the fundamental underpinnings
of quantum computing: this is where entanglement comes from; this is
where the exponential speedup comes from.

It's so very different from classical physics that if you chase it
out, you have consequences. One can just keep it at the level of
formalism, and then it's just notation; it's slightly weird. But then
you look at it and try to understand it, and it really has profound
consequences. So let's try to understand these consequences further.

[ calculating angles between states; inner product actually must be ]
[ equivalent to the product of the inner product of the components. ]

So now, let's back up for a moment and ask: we've said there's this
anomaly where we get a multiplicative effect instead of additive. Why?
They could be entangled. These states we are considering are product
states and are not entangled. In general, when you have a composite
system, you won't be able to decompose it into the tensor product of
two states, i.e. general state cannot be factored. For instance, Bell
states cannot be factored. You cannot say what the first particle must
be, and what the second state must be. All you can say is what the two
particles are simultaneously.

==== Intermission ====

Two different applications of concepts we've talked about before.

# No-cloning theorem

	Suppose you've got a qubit in the state |ψ〉, in some unknown
	state. Now that you have it, you'd like to make copies of it. What
	you have in your lab is lots and lots of qubits which you can
	initialize to the state |0〉. We also have a lot of fancy
	equipment. You think to yourself, surely, given the fact that I
	have all this fancy equipment and all these post-docs running
	around, we should be able to make at least one copy of this
	quantum state.

	So we want at least to have the state |Ψ〉 ⊗ |Ψ〉. We want to
	start with |Ψ〉 ⊗ 0 and go to |Ψ〉 ⊗ |Ψ〉 using fancy
	equipment. We can do plenty of unitary transformations (third
	axiom of quantum mechanics: no matter how big your lab is, it's
	only going to perform a unitary transformation). Is this possible?
	No-cloning theorem says this is impossible.

	There's a principle called the Church of the Larger Hilbert
	space. If you really want to, you could expand your Hilbert space,
	and consider measurements to be something that happens in this
	larger Hilbert space, and you're only looking at part of your
	data. In this larger Hilbert space, this is unitary in the larger
	Hilbert space.

	Right now we're considering a closed system. Later we can make
	this theorem more general and include everything, but the
	statement will remain the same.

	All you can do is perform some rotation on your Hilbert
	space. However, we must preserve angles. Such a unitary
	transformation only exists if we know that |Ψ〉 is one of two
	known orthogonal states.

	Basically, this tells us that we cannot clone an unknown quantum
	state. There is only one exception: when you know that it is one
	of two known orthogonal states.

Quantum Teleportation
=====================

	Related is the concept of quantum teleportation. Quantum
	teleportation provides a way to transfer a particle from one party
	to another, if the two parties share an EPR state (Bell state).

	Quantum teleportation is this protocol by which the first party
	performs a joint measurement on two qubits. The result of this
	measurement is one of four results, which is shared with the
	second party. The second party then performs one of four
	operations (a series of quantum gates) on the other qubit and
	receives as a result of these operations the original quantum
	state.

	There's this property of entanglement called monogamy. A qubit
	cannot be maximally entangled with multiple qubits.

These things took a while to figure out. At first, it was completely
unclear. When this was happening in the early 90s, we'd spend a lot of
time figuring these things out. It was not easy. We'll need some more
concepts, though.
