CS H195: Ethics with Harvey
===========================
September 10, 2012
------------------

Article from the Washington Post about the process by which the iPhone was
invented, based on internal memos and emails that came out in the Apple
v. Samsung lawsuit. Interesting: author is of view that Apple deserved to
win. What is interesting is the kinds of false starts they made, things
they had to redo, clever ideas. Interesting read.

Civilian "hacktivists" fight terrorists online. About random people who
attempt to infiltrate terrorist organizations online. If I were a
terrorist, I wouldn't be on the web. These guys make up fake identities for
themselves and acquire information they then pass on to the
government. Relevant to today's topic. Constraints on US Gov't that do not
apply to private parties. Police orgs can buy information that they would
not be able to collect themselves. This is not them buying: people
volunteering, but same issue.

What else is new? Bittorrent downloads monitored by copyright
enforcement. They only monitor popular stuff, so if you have obscure
tastes, then you're probably fine.

From Angry Birds to multiplayer video games, NASA ramps up investment in
education technology. They're working on a ten-million massively
multiplayer video game simulating life on Mars. They've already done some
other things in this game area. NASA's interested in education, and the way
to do education effectively seems to be to make games people want to play
(for the game) that are educational. Been done before; mostly bad. You're
playing some adventure game, slashing at monsters, and all of a sudden it
says "what is four times seven?" Interested both in recruiting next
generation of scientists and getting people interested in space to the
point the gov't will spend some money on it.

Internet addiction is real, German Researchers say. Found genetic variation
that might cause it. This is pretty iffy, in my opinion. What might be true
is that there are things in your genetic background that make you more or
less prone to obsessions of whatever kind; that could be true. You can look
it up, but I don't think that the study justified the idea that there's a
special one for internet addiction, but there you have it.

Anti-sec says Apple machine IDs leaked from some company.

That's the news. The topic that we're talking about this week is privacy. I
have to tell you that when I first heard about the topic of privacy on
computers, my reaction was "I don't have anything to hide; why do I care?"
Very valid reaction, some of you are probably thinking that too. So why
should we care about privacy? I want to put aside reasons relating to fear
of identity theft.

One of the things I hope you read this week was the article by James
Rachels. Nobody has nothing to hide -- not even you. You might not be doing
anything to get in trouble, but you may have quirks that you practice in
private (with selected friends).

As we speak, I'm having a little conflict with an administrator (having to
do with 61AS), and the way I talk about it with my colleagues is different
than the way I talk about it to this administrator's boss. It's different
tones: it's not different facts or opinions; it's different tones.

Identity theft: all I'm going to say about that right now: unless you've
looked into it, it's way easier than you think. Researcher at MIT found
that birth date and zip code is all they need to find your medical
records. Can look at anonymized public health data and find you in it.

So. Speaking of medical records, by law, employers are not supposed to use
medical information about you in hiring decisions. There are two reasons
they might want to. One of them is prejudice (so the canonical example is
"you have AIDS", and they think that means you've been behaving sinfully,
and they don't want to hire you, but another is that you might have some
disability that would require special accommodation from your employer that
they might not want to bother with).

Repurposing of information: e.g. Google reading your email to sell you to
advertisers (choosing which ads to display to you). The textbook example of
repurposing that people talk about is around election time, Republicans
make a big issue about welfare fraud. Exists in small amounts. Makes for
good headlines, and so they have these big campaigns to try to catch
welfare cheaters. Back in the 1970s, the state of Massachusetts had the
clever idea of taking their computerized list of welfare recipients and
their computerized list of state employees and doing a merge (checking
which people were on both lists). Found a bunch, but a lot turned out to
not be double-dippers (not working and collecting unemployment), but rather
mistaken matches. Would think that this would not happen, but in fact there
were many people with the same name, or they found some people who used to
work for the state (or used to be on welfare), and just plain wrong
information. Eventually that all got cleared up, but not until after the
state police showed up knocking on people's doors and asking for
information. That's a technical example of what can go wrong with
repurposing information.

Those are the arguments about privacy (why privacy matters) even if you
don't have any secrets. You can get into accidental trouble, can be
discriminated against (for various reasons), and you can be embarrassed for
something turning up in a different context. Happens to people of Harvey's
age who in their youths participated in Usenet. And I know it never
occurred to me in a million years that someone was archiving this stuff,
because something I said forty years ago (online) is still around. Would
have phrased things more carefully if I realized that I was making a
permanent record.

So I want to talk for a minute about the law and privacy. So I should start
by saying I'm not a lawyer, not giving legal advice, etc.

No absolute right to privacy. Cases where various people have legal
authority to look at data you thought was private. Maybe the most obvious
one is if you're suspected of a crime, the police can get a search warrant
to break into your house and look at your stuff, let alone your
computer. But maybe a less obvious case is the one about credit
report. Every time you make a financial transaction, it gets reported to
the credit bureau. Not gov't; it's a private company. I think most people
would say that's a legitimate business purpose.

So. Lots of people can have access to your information for lots of
perfectly good reasons. But in the case of the gov't, there's a long
history of limitations because of the right to privacy in the fourth
amendment. There are some funny exceptions to those limitations. For
instance: you can't be stopped and searched without probable cause, except
that on New Year's Eve, the highway patrol is allowed to stop every tenth
car and breath that student. Result of CA supreme court decision. Can see
purpose of it, but it's a random stop and search.

One that's so common that people don't even think about it any more is the
inspection of your luggage at the airport. The legitimate purpose of that
is people blowing up the airplane, but if they happen to find drugs in your
luggage, the fact that that has nothing to do with terrorism, they can
still arrest you.

The situation is tricky: you can't just say nobody should ever have access
to information about me period. There are many legitimate reasons; that's
why the issue of repurposing is so important. Thought experiment: problem
of terrorists blowing up airports, special team of finding these
terrorists. All they're doing is searching for weapons; they can't do
anything about anything else they find. That would be a way to prevent
repurposing.

When the police have unrestricted power, bad things tend to happen. Privacy
isn't mentioned in the Constitution. It's a judicial construct.

9/11? Massive change to your right to privacy, and not one for the better,
I would argue. Largely to the passing of laws that are not constitutional,
in part due to things that are extra-legal.

Legal to eavesdrop on international calls. Not yet legal to monitor
domestic calls. Law now requires ISPs to make it easy to wiretap a person's
communication.

Some things about the needs that conflict with privacy. Textbook of CS10
(Blown to Bits) starts with a story of a woman who drove her car off the
road, hanging on a cliff (unconscious) for a period of five days because
that's how long it took for the police to get legal access to her cell
phone carrier's information to which cell tower her phone was last in. By
law, if you're an adult, you have to be gone three days before they declare
you a missing person (since maybe you went missing on purpose).

Not a story that happens every day. She lived, by the way. Extreme case in
which privacy conflicts with other needs.

More common thing that conflicts with privacy: most common is just
convenience.

Third parties holding onto your information. Different companies have
different policies. Mostly pretty bad. Google actually is relatively good,
in the following sense: they have fought even subpoenas that they
considered to be overbroad.

During the last big epidemic scare, Google published a map regarding where
there was a big number of search queries of a particular flu. Was very
accurate (week ahead of public health) and was in fact life-saving. Good
use of information where there wasn't any "who made the queries" but rather
just how many.

Two threats to privacy: governments and businesses. Third (recent) one:
individual people with cameras on cell phones.
