CS H195: Ethics with Harvey
===========================
September 17, 2012
------------------
Lawsuit to get records about NSA's surveillance information.

Video games affecting people, evidently.

Government subpoenaed Twitter to give people tweets.

Records can be subpoenaed in a court case, etc. We'll see how this plays
out. Today, in today's Daily Cal, UCB suing big companies. Universities do
research, etc. Back in the day, core memory meant people paid money to IBM
and MIT. Berkeley holds a bunch of patents. Non-software seems reasonable.

Important point: the burst of genius is very rarely true. Enabling
technologies have reached the point of making things feasible. Usual story
about inventions. Flash bulb in a camera, single-use: before sustainable
light bulb. Steam engine. Some inventions aren't like that. Some really do
just come to somebody (velcro, xerography). Nobody else was working on
that. More often, everyone is thinking about this stuff.

IP. A patent is the right to develop an invention, to produce things
dependent on an invention. Copyright is not about invention, it's about
creative and artistic works. And there, if you have an idea and write about
it, other people are allowed to use your ideas, not your words. Trademark,
you know what it is; you can register one; people are not allowed to use it
in ways that might confuse people. You can in principle make a vacuum
cleaner called "time". How close do things have to be to raise a lawsuit?
Lawsuit about Apple Computers vs Apple Records. Later did, which caused a
later round of battling.

Personal likeness, I can't take a picture of you and publish it with
certain exceptions. Most important for famous people. Funny rules:
newsworthy, and news photographers are allowed to take pictures of
newsworthy people.

Trade secrets: if a company has secrets, and you are a competing company,
you may not send a spy to extract these secrets.

House ownership. There are houses where people have had houses for
millennia. Patents and copyrights are not like that: not a right. Those
things are bargains between creators and society. Purpose to society is
that these eventually belong to the public. One of the readings talks about
a different history of patents quoting Italian legal scholars, and if
correct, patents were supposed to be permanent ownership. Why might it be
good to society? Used to be people who made new inventions. Guilds. Hard to
join, and you would be a slave for a while. Master would teach apprentice
the trade, and advantage was that it reduced competition. Trouble was that
there is a long history of things people used to be able to do that we
can't anymore. Textbook example: Stradivarius violins.

Nonetheless, nobody knows how Stradivarius made violins. Stories about how
to make paints of particular colors. What the patent system is trying to
avoid. Describe how invention works so someone in the field can create
it. By making this disclosure, you are given a limited-term exclusive right
to make these.

The thing is, sooner or later, your technology is going to be obsolete. To
your advantage to have a clear legal statement.

Patent treaties. Used to be that if you invented something important, you'd
hire a bunch of lawyers.

Until recently, software was not patentable. ATT wanted to patent the
SETUID bit. In those days, you could not patent any math or software or
algorithm.

Patents stifling innovation in the field. When you file a patent
application. Let's say you deny the patent. You would like to fall back on
trade secrecy. Patent applications are secret until approved. Startups
doomed. Wouldn't matter if term were short compared to innovation cycle of
the industry.

Another thing in the Constitution is that treaties take precedence over
domestic laws.

So let's talk about copyrights! So. Nobody says let's do away with
copyright altogether. Copyright (at its worst) is less socially harmful
than patents because it's so specific. Again, copyrights are a
bargain. Started in Britain between the King and printers. Printers wanted
exclusive right to things they printed. King wanted printers to be
censors. Originally not authors who had copyright, but the publisher. Often
creators of rights will sell the rights to publishers.

This is where computers come in. How to sell to world? Used to need big
company with facilities to create copies and widely
distribute. Self-publish: work available to everyone. Important: rarely
author who complains about copyrights. Usually publishers.

There's always been piracy, but limited historically by analog media losing
information when copying.

Term of copyright has gotten longer and longer. Lawsuit about this about
the most recent extension. In effect, making permanent copyright, against
constitution. Ironic because copyright law now would have made much of
what made Disney rich would have been copyrighted. Lot of exceptions to
copyright law. Fair use. e.g. cannot write a Harry Potter novel, but can
write a Harry Potter parody. Famous case: Gone with the Wind. About how
wonderful life was for the owners of slaves. Someone wrote a book
(retelling from slave's point of view); ruled as fair use (political
commentary, protected by free speech).

Stallman actually invented a system that has 5 different categories of
work. Even Stallman doesn't say to ditch copyright. Hardly any musicians
make any money selling music because their contracts say that they make a
certain percentage of net proceeds. The way musicians survive is concerts,
and ironically, selling concert CDs. Stallman says to make music players
have a money button and send money directly to the musician.
