CS H195: Ethics with Harvey
===========================
September 24, 2012
------------------
Vastly oversimplified picture of moral philosophy. Leaves out a lot.

So Socrates says famously "to know the good is to desire the good", by
which he means that if you really understand what's in your own interest,
it's going to turn out to be the right thing. Counter-intuitive, since
we've probably encountered situations in which we think what's good for us
isn't good for the rest of the community.

Ended up convicting Socrates, and he was offered the choice between exile
from Athens and death -- chose death because he felt that he could not
exist outside of his own community. His most famous student was Plato, who
started an Academy (Socrates just wandered around from hand to mouth), took
in students (one of whom was Aristotle). If you're scientists or engineers,
you've been taught to make fun of Aristotle, since he said that heavier
objects fall faster than light objects, and famously, Galileo took two
objects, dropped them, and they hit the ground at the same time.

It's true that some of the things Aristotle said about the physical world
have turned out not to be right. But it's important to understand it in
terms of the physical world, he did not have the modern idea of trying to
make a universal theory that explained everything.

Objects falling in atmosphere with friction different from behavior of
planets orbiting sun? Perfectly fine with Aristotle.

One of the things Aristotle knew? When you see a plate of donuts, you know
perfectly well that it's just carbs and fat and you shouldn't eat them, but
you do anyway. Socrates explains that as "you don't really know through and
through that it is bad for you", and Aristotle doesn't like that
explanation. Knowing what to do and actually doing it are two different
things. Took that in two directions: action syllogism (transitivity),
extended so that conclusion of the syllogism can be an action. Not
important to us: important to us is that he introduces the idea of
virtues. A virtue is not an understanding of what's right, but a habit --
like a good habit you get into.

Aristotle lists a bunch of virtues, and in all cases he describes it as a
midpoint between two extremes (e.g. courage between cowardice and
foolhardiness, or honesty as a middle ground between dishonesty and saying
too much).

Better have good habits, since you don't have time in real crises to
think. So Aristotle's big on habits. And he says that you learn the virtues
through being a member of a community and through the role you play in that
community, Lived in a time that people inherited roles a lot. The argument
goes a little like this. What does it mean to be a good person? Hard
question. What does it mean to be a good carpenter? Much easier. A good
carpenter builds stuff that holds together and looks nice, etc. What are
the virtues that lead to being a good carpenter? Also easy: patience, care,
measurement, honesty, etc. Much easier than what's a good
person.

Aristotle's going to say that the virtues of being a good person are
precisely the virtues you learn in social practices from people older than
you who are masters of the practice. One remnant of that in modern society
is martial arts instruction. When you go to a martial arts school and say
you want to learn, one of the first things you learn is respect for your
instructor, and you're supposed to live your life in a disciplined way, and
you're not learning skills so much as habits. Like what Aristotle'd say
about any practice. Not so much of that today: when you're learning to be a
computer scientist, there isn't a lot of instruction in "here are the
habits that make you a (morally) good computer scientist".

Kant was not a communitarian: was more of "we can figure out the right
answer to ethical dilemmas." He has an axiom system, just like in
mathematics: with small numbers of axioms, you can prove things. Claims
just one axiom, which he describes in multiple ways.

Categorical imperative number one: treat people as ends, not means. This is
the grown-up version of the golden rule. Contracts are all right as long as
both parties have their needs met and exchange is not too unequal.

Second version: universalizability. An action is good if it is
universalizable. That means, if everybody did it, would it work? Textbook
example is "you shouldn't tell lies". The only reason telling lies works is
because people usually tell the truth, and so people are predisposed to
thinking that it's usually true. If everyone told lies, then we'd be
predisposed to disbelieve statements. Lying would no longer be effective.

There's a third one which BH can never remember which is much less
important. Kant goes on to prove theorems to resolve moral dilemmas.

Problem from Kant: A runs past you into the house. B comes up with a gun
and asks you where A is. Kant suggests something along the lines of
misleading B.

Axiomatic, resolve ethical problems through logic and proving what you want
to do. Very popular among engineers, mainly for the work of Rawls, who
talks about the veil of ignorance. You have to imagine yourself, looking at
life on Earth, and not knowing in what social role you're going to be
born. Rawls thinks that from this perspective, you have to root for the
underdog when situations come up, because in any particular thing that
comes up, harm to the rich person is going to be less than the gains of the
poor person (in terms of total wealth, total needs). Going to worry about
being on side of underdog, etc. More to Rawls: taking into account how
things affect all different constituencies.

Another descendant of Plato are utilitarians. One of the reasons it's
important for you to understand this chart: when you don't think about it
too hard, you use utilitarian principles, which is sometimes
bad. Utilitarians talk about the greatest good for the greatest number.

Back to something from this class: what if I illegally download some movie?
Is that okay? How much do I benefit, and how much is the movie-maker
harmed? Not from principled arguments, which is what Kant wants you to do,
but from nuts and bolts, who benefits how much, each way.

Putting that in a different fashion, Kantians are interested in what
motivates your action, why you did it. Utilitarians are interested in the
result of your action. One thing that makes utilitarian hard is that you
have to guess as to what probably will happen.

Now I want to talk to you about MacIntyre. Gave you a lot of reading,
probably hardest reading in the course. Talks like a philosopher. Uses
dessert as what you deserve (noun of deserve). Life-changing for BH when he
came across MacIntyre; passing it on to you as a result.

He starts by saying to imagine an aftermath in which science is blamed and
destroyed. A thousand years later, some people digging through the remains
of our culture read about this word science, and it's all about
understanding how the physical world works, and they want to revive this
practice. Dig up books by scientists, read and memorize bits of them,
analyze, have discussions. The people who do this call themselves
scientists because they're studying science.

We from our perspective would say that isn't science at all -- you don't
just engage with books, but rather engage with the physical world through
experiments. Those imagined guys from a millennium from now have lost the
practice. They think they're following a practice, but they have no idea
what it's like. MacIntyre argues this is us with ethics.

Equivalent to WW3 according to MacIntyre is Kant. Kant really, more than
anyone else, brought into being the modern era. Why? Because in the times
prior to Kant, a lot of arguments not only about ethics but also by the
physical world were resolved by religious authority. Decisions made based
on someone's interpretation of the bible, e.g.

Kant claims to be a Christian, but he thinks the way we understand God's
will is by applying the categorical imperative. Instead of asking a priest
what to do, we reason it out. We don't ask authorities, we work it out.
Also, he starts this business of ethical dilemmas. Everybody in the top
half of the world talks in terms of the good life. Even Socrates, who
thinks you can know what to do, talks about the good life, too. So ethics
is not about "what do I do in this situation right now", but rather the
entirety of one's life and what it means to live a good life.

Kant and Mill: no sense of life as a flow; rather, moments of
decisions. What MacIntyre calls the ethical equivalent of WW3: at that
point, we lost the thread, since we stopped talking about the good
life. Now, it wasn't an unmitigated disaster, since it gives us -- the
modern liberal society, not in the American sense of voting for democrats,
but in the sense that your life goals are up to you as an individual, and
the role of society is to build infrastructure and getting in people's way,
so stopping people from doing things. I can, say, have some sexual practice
different from yours. So that was a long time coming. Now, in our
particular culture, the only thing that's bad is having sex with children,
as far as I can tell -- as long as it doesn't involve you messing up
someone else's life, e.g. rape. As long as it involves two (or more?)
consenting adults, that's okay.

MacIntyre says that there are things that came up with Kant that we can't
just turn back to being Aristotlean. The people who lived the good life
were male Athenian citizens. They had wives who weren't eligible, and they
had slaves who did most of the grunt work. And so male Athenian citizens
could spend their time walking around chatting with Socrates because they
were supported by slavery. And nobody wants to go back to that. No real way
to go back to being Aristotlean without giving up modern civil rights.

So. One of the things I really like about MacIntyre is the example of
wanting to teach a child how to play chess, but he's not particularly
interested. He is, however, interested in candy. You say, every time you
play with me, I'll give you a piece of candy. If you win, two pieces. Will
play in a way that's difficult but possible to beat me. So, MacIntyre says
this child is now motivated to play and to play well. But he's also
motivated to cheat, if he can get away with it. So let's say this
arrangement goes on for some time, and the kid gets better at it. What you
hope is that the child reaches a point where the game is valuable to
itself: he or she sees playing chess as rewarding (as an intellectual
challenge). When that happens, cheating becomes self-defeating.

While the child is motivated by external goods (rewards, money, fame,
whatever), then the child is not part of the community of practice. But
once the game becomes important (the internal benefits motivate him), then
he does feel like part of the community. Huge chess community with
complicated infrastructure with rating, etc. And that's a community with
practice, and it has virtues (some of which are unique to chess, but maybe
not -- e.g. planning ahead). Honesty, of course; patience; personal
improvement.

And the same is true with most things that human beings do. Not
everything. MacIntyre raises the example of advertising. What are the
virtues of this practice? Well, appealing to people in ways that they don't
really see; suggesting things that aren't quite true without saying
them. He lists several virtues that advertising people have, and these
virtues don't generalize. Not part of being a good person; not even
compatible with being a good person. So different from virtues of normal
practices.

Having advertising writers is one of the ways in which MacIntyre thinks
we've just lost the thread. The reason we have them is that we hold up in
our society the value of furthering your own ambition and getting rich, and
not getting rich by doing something that's good anyway, but just getting
rich. That's an external motivation rather than an internal one.

We talk about individuals pursuing their own ends. We glorify -- take as an
integral part of our society -- as individuals pursuing their own ends. In
a modern understanding of ethics, you approach each new situation as if
you've never done anything. You don't learn from experience; you learn from
rules. The result may be the same for each intermediate situation, but it
leads to you thinking differently. You don't think about building good
habits in this context.

A lot of you probably exercise (unlike me). Maybe you do it because it's
fun, but maybe you also do it because it only gets harder as you get older,
and you should get in the habit to keep it up. In that area, you get into
habits. But writing computer programs, we tell you about rules (don't have
concurrency violations), and I guess implicitly, we say that taking 61B is
good for you because you learn to write bigger programs. Still true --
still a practice with virtues.

Two things: that sort of professional standard of work is a pretty narrow
ethical issue. They don't teach you to worry about the privacy implications
of third parties. Also, when people say they have an ethical dilemma, they
think about it as a decision. A communitarian would reject all that ethical
dilemma stuff. Dilemmas will have bad outcomes regardless. Consider Greek
tragedies. When Oedipus finds himself married to his mother, it's like game
over. Whole series of bad things that happen to him. Not much he can do
about it on an incident by incident basis. Problem is a fatal flaw in his
character early on (as well as some ignorance), and no system of ethics is
going to lead Oedipus out of this trap. What you have to is try not to get
into traps, and you do that through prudence and honesty and whatnot.

Classic dilemma: Heins is a guy whose wife has a fatal disease that can be
cured by an expensive drug, but Heins is poor. So he goes to the druggist
and says that he can't afford to pay for this drug, but his wife is going
to die, so the druggist says no. So Heins is considering breaking into the
drugstore at night and stealing the drug so his wife can live. What should
he do and why? According to the literature, there's no right answer. What
matters is your reason.

I'm going to get this wrong, but it's something like this. Stage one: your
immediate needs are what matter. Yes, he should steal it, because it's his
wife, or no, he shouldn't steal it, because he should go to prison. Stage
two: something like worrying about consequences to individuals. Might hurt
druggist or might hurt his wife. Stage three: something like "well, I have
a closer relationship to my wife than the druggist; I care more about my
wife, so I should steal it". Stage four: it's against the law, and I
shouldn't break the law. Stage five: like stage three, generalized to
larger community: how much will it hurt my wife not to get the drug? A
lot. How much will it hurt the druggist if I steal it? Some money. Stage
six, based not on laws of community, but rather on the standards of the
community. Odd-numbered stages are about specific people. Even-numbered
stages are about society and rules (punishment if I do it to it's the law
to it's what people expect of me).

Right now I'm talking about the literature of moral psychology: people go
through these stages (different ways of thinking). Question posed is not
"how do people behave", but rather "how should people behave".

This is modern ethical reasoning. Take some situation that has no right
answer, and split hairs about finding a right answer somehow.

Talk about flying: checklist for novices. Instructors don't use this list:
eventually, you get to where you're looking at the entire dashboard at
once, and things that aren't right jump out at you.

Another example: take a bunch of chess pieces, put them on the board, get
someone to look at it for a minute, and take the pieces away, and ask the
person to reconstruct the board position. Non-chess players are terrible
(unsurprisingly); chess grandmasters can do it if it came out of a real
game; if you put it randomly, they're just as bad as the rest of
us. They're not looking at individual pieces; they're looking at the board
holistically (clusters of pieces that interact with each other).

Relevance to this about ethics: we don't always know why we do things. Very
rare that we have the luxury to figure out either what categorical
imperative tells us or utilitarian approach. Usually we just do something.

BH with weaknesses. Would be stronger if his education was less about
thinking things through and more about doing the right thing.

Our moral training is full of "Shalt Not"s. Lot more in the Bible about
what not to do than what to do or how to live the good life (that part of
the Bible -- gets better). We also have these laws. Hardly ever say you
have to do something (aside from paying taxes). Mostly say what you can't
do. Never say how to live the good life. BH thinks that serves us ill. Have
to make decisions. Often, what you do is different from what you say you
should do.
