CS H195: Ethics with Harvey
===========================
October 1, 2012
---------------

Star Wars: Idea that was developed and led by Edward Teller (one of the
inventors of the H-bomb, leading scientist at Lawrence Livermore
Labs). Really liked building weapons systems. His idea was to build a
network of satellites in space whose purpose would be to shoot down
missiles aimed at the United States.

Lot of reasons to be interested in lasers; one of them was weapons. Reagan
really loved this idea.

Talk about how things changed after 9/11?

There has not been a day since 9/11 where the United States has been at
peace, but I'm pretty sure this is true, none of those wars have ever been
declared.

Prior to 9/11, last attack on US territory was Pearl Harbor (before that
was 1812). The United States is pretty safe against foreign attackers
except for the small group of infiltrated commandos who used to not be much
to worry about, but now they can carry nuclear weapons in their suitcase,
so that's a worry. Hasn't happened yet, but it could.

Three thousand Americans died in 9/11? The US kills more civilians than
that every day. It's not hard to argue that the US response to 9/11 has
been disproportionate.

Even beyond the egregiously bad military technologies (like these drone
attacks), I would be happy if the United States did not have any military
capability at all. And Americans are so accustomed to thinking that we're
the good guys.

Official definition of terrorism: military action taken by a non-government
body. Therefore terrorism is by definition the response of the
disenfranchised people to their situation. Suppose you are in a population
that has no government of its own, has no military, is being oppressed all
the time, and wants to fight back. How do you do it? You can't really
attack anybody's army; there aren't enough of you. So unless you're Gandhi
-- other response: pacifism, and that worked for Gandhi because despite
everything, the British empire had this image of themselves as
paternalistic. So Gandhi was able to shame the British into behaving better
to Indians. The US has no shame, so if you want to fight back, being Gandhi
is a pretty hard sell. The reason the name is terrorist is that you want to
make your enemy afraid.

So what's happened in the United States since 9/11? We've become
afraid. And for political reasons of its own, our government has encouraged
us to feel afraid. When you do that, the terrorists have won. The
large-scale way to fight back against terrorism is to decide not to be
afraid and not to flail around attacking every country you've never heard
of because you're afraid. So yeah, I would be happy if we stopped having a
military, period, since I don't trust the US to have a military. Not honest
enough or decent enough or law-abiding enough to have a military. Maybe we
can sign a treaty with Canada to protect us when people come in and invade.

I had to say all of that, but I don't want the takeaway message to be "you
should be a pacifist or anti-US". The message is that just as computers are
vitally important to our lives, they are vitally important in war, so some
of you are going to have jobs in which you will be building weapons of
war. If you're in that situation, you need to think extra hard about
whether you're doing the right thing or not.
