CS H195: Ethics with Harvey
===========================
October 15, 2012
---------------
(note: left laptop at home on Oct. 8)

Fusion center: place where different law enforcement agencies come together
to share information. So this is partly a kludgy workaround because there
are legal limitations on data collection by the federal government. Data
collection by the states is much less regulated. Loophole is that states
can get together and have centers that amount to nationwide data collection
facilities without actually being run by the government.

Run by LA times. Saying that compared to pre-9/11 law enforcement, these
haven't done a lot but do pose a civil liberties threat. If interested in
privacy and government, you can look this up.

COPPA!

From the New York Times, big campaign going on by internet advertisers to
try to stop the "do not track" movement. One thing that started this:
latest IE do-not-track defaults on. For once, good for Microsoft. You don't
hear me say that very often. And the advertising people say that it's bad
enough if people choose do-not-track, but it should be opt-in, not
opt-out.

Microsoft points out that when you set up the browser, you answer a series
of questions, and it defaults on in that the checkbox is checked by default
if you don't read it carefully.

Supposedly could pose a threat to barter system. Attacking authority of
W3C.

Today's Daily Cal. Breaking into others' brains. Article about this toy
that is a mind-control device. Have you seen this? You put on a little
helmet and mentally give commands to a ball, which you can move by brain
waves. A postdoc at the security research lab at Berkeley wondered whether
this could be used to find out things about you that you weren't aware
about. The issue is whether someone could write malware for these devices
that would find out your social security number or something. They actually
found that if you put up a question on the screen while someone's using
this thing, they can detect brain activity related to some answer to the
question. The reliability was not very good, and the method wasn't exactly
subliminal. This is first-generation, and presumably the hardware will get
better. So one of the things you have to worry about is "brain-hacking".

I just sent out a bspace email with paper topic #2, about the thing we're
talking about this week, computers in community. "Identify from the readings
three ways the internet might be a democratizing force, and three in which
it might be an anti-democratizing force."

Speaking of papers, I have your first papers. Just before class, I xeroxed
them.

For next time, when you submit a paper, please do it single-sided and not
stapled. So if it's multi-page, put your name on every page.

Okay. So that's the story on papers for now. We're going to talk about
computers and community. Because you're engineers, I made a graph
here. Democratizingness on a scale from 0 to 1 plotted against time. Vastly
simplified picture, but there's some truth to it.

Before there was the web, there was the internet, and there was email and
newsgroups. In the beginning, anyone could post to any newsgroup, and then
they invented moderated newsgroups, but the technology was not very strong,
but at least in principle, moderated.

Example: rec.humor; got to be very high in traffic of dubious taste, so
someone started a moderated newsgroup, rec.humor.funny. Messages were in
ASCII, which had good and bad parts. The good part was that there was no
premium for graphic design expertise. The bad part was that it was
accessible primarily in western European languages, which leaves out a lot
of the population of the world, but that wasn't as big of a problem, since
physical location also left out a lot of the world.

ICANN. So pre-web, everybody was equal to everybody else in posting ideas,
so for the people who had internet access, it was pretty democratic, but
that left out a lot of people, many of whom had never heard of the
internet, let alone be connected to it.

And then came along the world wide web, which to the surprise of everybody,
totally changed the nature of the net. Tim Berners-Lee invented it, wanted
to make it easier to find stuff, but it really concentrated the ability to
disseminate ideas in the hands of big companies because in the early days,
it cost a lot to have a web server, and you had to be a professional to
design a web page, and there were a few places that everyone knew about
where they got their information.

It really made the internet a one-way medium: broadcasting, instead of
exchanging. Saved, somewhat, by the invention of the blog. I guess I have
to say facebook, even though I hate it, was a democratizing force; people
were able to use the internet for their own uses rather than the uses of
someone else.

The reason I drew the second dot higher than the first is not because of
Web 2.0 so much as vastly greater connectivity. I'm making an assumption in
all this that democratizion is a good idea. I don't know that anyone would
argue that it's a bad idea, per se, but a lot of people will say that
what's important about the internet is that I can get on and buy stuff, or
I can read the news, or I can search for stuff that other people have put
on the net. And those aspects are not exactly anti-democratizing (except
for web search, which I'll say more about in a moment), but it turns out to
be quite a shame if the main point of the internet is to let you buy
stuff. Statistically speaking, the main use is to let you buy pornography,
which has driven the technology to some extent. However you feel about
pornography, it's a shame if that's all the internet is good for.

Web search: if you get back a page from Google, it lists how many results,
and it lists 20 or so, and nobody gets past the second page, few people get
past the first page, and most don't get past the first 5. Ordering by
relevance. Google controls that ordering in a very mindful way. For the
most part, what they're trying to do is get you the stuff you'll consider
most useful: they're trying to be a good agent for you in terms of how they
present information for you. Other times, they intervene and aren't
entirely about that.

The original PageRank algorithm was simple and gameable. You could get your
page high up in the rankings with bigger pages that had nothing to do with
utility. Google began detecting attempts to game the situation and
penalized them. Shows amount of control Google has. On other times, they
make decisions on a political basis. So, I believe right now they penalize
sights that get a lot of DMCA takedown notices. So if people are telling
your site you have copyrighted material on it, they count complaints, not
valid complaints.

Occasionally, they're more explicit things, where they just won't list
certain things at all. One example that came up a few years back was people
selling prescription drugs on the internet. Why is that? Because in the
United States, a lot of medicines are a lot more expensive than they are
elsewhere in the world, because of peculiarities in our patent
system. Companies were started in Canada and Mexico to sell drugs to people
in the US for cheaper. Turns out that some are just as good, and sometimes
that was not the case.

Apart from search, there are some obvious ways in which the internet
remains not democratic. If you want to know what's going on, you don't go
to some blog, you go to CNN or Fox or whatever. Compared to other media, it
still does very well. Way better than television or even newspapers as a
way of allowing non-mainstream information and ideas to be expressed. But
it's not the case that everybody has the same access as everybody else.

You probably know (but maybe not) that your broadband service (unless you
spend a lot of money on it) is asymmetrical. Designed on assumption that
you'll be doing a lot more downloading than uploading. You can get
symmetric internet access, but it's really expensive (and they assume only
businesses want this).

That may change because of things like Youtube. Lot more uploading by
people than in the early days. Maybe, down the road, we'll start seeing
more nearly symmetrical broadband access. That would be a good sign.

Then there are the more subtle ways in which the net in a different sense
works against democracy. Democracy requires an informed citizenry, and one
of the things the internet has done is make it possible for you to read
only the opinions you already agree with. Something scholars of the
internet worry about. If you get a traditional newspaper, it isn't neutral
in its point of view, but if it's not Rupert-Murdoch-owned, it will
typically bend over backwards to carry columnists and op-eds that disagree
with its point of view.

I don't think that's possible, by the way, presenting news impartially, but
they try. Whereas on the internet, there are left-wing and right-wing news
sources that publish exclusively. Means less likely to be well-informed
about contentious issues.

One of the articles is about the issue of the digital divide. When people
first coined the term, it meant something simple: rich were connected, poor
were not. Now it's more subtle, so rich people's connectivity may be better
in certain ways, rich people's skill at using the internet may be better in
certain ways, but raw connectivity, if you look in the United States, at
least, everybody can get on the internet, because if nothing else, you can
go to the public library and log into the internet there. The rest of the
world is not there yet; improving. There still is a digital divide, but
motivated by the lack of women in Computer Science (positive feedback). If
women aren't in computer science, they're less likely to be skilled in
computers, which means they're less likely to see the benefit of computers,
so they're less likely to get interested in computer science.

Online surveys, submissions, propositions. Good questions much more
important than the answers.

Virtual rape (one of the readings). The woman in the case felt raped. Now,
there wasn't any physical contact involved, so technically she wasn't
raped. The question is just how serious is this? Article is about not just
that it happened, but because this was a user community without much in the
way of rules. The user community had to grope toward rules.

You should read the article; it's pretty interesting. You should read all
the articles. The point I want to get to about it is the one about making
decisions in an online community and how that happens. Again has to do with
how democratic is the net, and many answers to that. Many online
communities in which some company is in charge. Usually, some company set
up the forum in which the community exists, and that company gets to make
the rules. Sometimes it's more like a newsgroup (there still are
newsgroups; usually hosted by Google or Yahoo these days rather than the
original NNTP, but they exist), and in many cases, it really is up to the
participants what are the rules. Sometimes has to do with legal rules, and
the relevant ones here have to do with copyright and pornography. Copyright
we've talked about a lot; pornography we'll talk about. I guess also
libel. You can libel someone online. But when there was the case when some
girl's mother pretended to be a boy and got into an online relationship
with some other girl her daughter didn't like, and harassed the girl until
she killed herself. Everyone wanted to punish the mother, but they had
difficulty finding a law she broke.

Lot of room for decisions to be made beyond what the law says. How people
make those decisions - the fact that it's made by some company doesn't mean
that it's made poorly, which happens sometimes, but sometimes not
(sometimes some blog-hosting site takes seriuosly its responsibility to
promote wide-ranging discussion allowing all points of view to be presented
while not allowing harassment or libel) - I think that democratic
decision-making is a good thing totally separate from how the decisions
turn out (just a matter of opinion). I also think that in general, you get
better decisions the more democratic they are (at least in the long
run). Not always true in the short run. Little digression into the Bill of
Rights of the US constitution: you probably took this class in middle
school, but in case you've forgotten (or were using your computer instead
of paying attention back then), it is not a document to protect democracy,
but rather to limit democracy so the rights of minorities would be
protected.

Right after 9/11, it would be very easy to get through Congress a law
discriminating against Arabs. Didn't happen because the Constitution
doesn't let the government make laws like that. Cannot pass Bills of
Attainder (law saying people with orange t-shirts have to go to prison --
that would be a bill of attainder). You have to actually do something
illegal to be punished by law. That is an effort to prevent ill-considered
rush judgments by a majority from taking effect. Another thing in the
Constitution meant to slow down the government is the fact that we both
have the Senate and House of Representatives. Make it harder to pass
laws. Sometimes that thwarts the will of the majority. There are some good
reasons you want to have limits on democracy. But nonetheless, it's still
better than no democracy at all.

So on the internet, we have seen examples of populist direct action that
are not so good. Kind of mob actions against somebody. Sometimes it is good
when that kind of thing happens. Every so often there's a story from China
about some government official who runs someone over in their car, and
because it's a government official, nothing happens, and people get upset,
which makes things happen to this person. So that's good. Sometimes people
are shamed, maybe out of proportion about what happens. By the way, this
shaming business isn't necessarily something that results from mass
populist actions. There has been a certain vogue among law enforcement and
individuals to post on the internet pictures of people approaching
prostitutes, and that's either the government doing it or just one
person. What do you think about that?

Lots of questions about police collecting evidence. Is it okay for them to
be hiding when collecting evidence? All really complicated because court
decisions have not been crystal clear about the collection of
evidence.

To be effective, a law does not have to be 100% effective. The law against
robbing the 7/11 on the corner does not totally prevent that from
happening, but presumably it would happen more if it weren't a law. So
that's one part of the answer. Another part is you're right, and some
cities in the US (and many more in Europe) have taken the stance of
licensing prostitutes in the same way as barbers. Part of the licensing is
regular blood tests and rules about using condoms, and also, of course,
being of age. So you can have an interesting discussion about what's the
best way to do away with sex slavery by changing laws. This question, by
the way, is on the California ballot! One piece of that law (ballot
proposition) besides the part about sex slavery has to do with internet
regulation. I think it's badly drafted, and they should try again. I think
the underlying purpose is good, but I don't like the proposition. That's
one of the problems with ballot propositions as a form of democracies. You
only get to say yes or no.

Arrow's theorem: impossible for any voting system to be correct. 1) you
voting for a candidate should never hurt the candidate. 2) you'd like it
not to be gameable; the best thing for you to do as a strategy is for you
to vote as you want. Half a dozen or so criteria that are obviously right
criteria, and you can't satisfy all of them. Instant run-off. If in the
first ballot no candidate has a majority, then you cross off the least
popular candidate and that candidate's votes are given to the person's
second choice, and you keep doing that until some candidate has a
majority. It turns out that the run-off violates some of these
properties. There are more complicated versions that do better, but it is
provable that you can't get all of them.
