<a name='1'></a>

CS H195: Ethics with Harvey
===========================
August 27, 2012
---------------

Good afternoon. Probably people will be trickling in because they will have
gone to the old room. We'll start anyway.

Um, okay! Welcome to Social Implications of Computers. I apologize in
advance for being disorganized an unenergetic -- just got off an airplane,
so forgive me.

So let's start with the news. Cell phone exposure limits should be
reassessed. (This is a bit old, but still news.) This business about cell
phone radiation has been controversial, and there's never been any really
clear hundred percent convincing evidence that cell phone radiation hurts
you, but there have been some suggested studies. The government
accountability office suggests that it should be studied yet again.

One thing is, by the way, the situation keeps changing as the technology
changes.

The nice thing about GSM is that with the old techs, if your cell phone
cannot find a signal, it keeps broadcasting harder and harder until it
fries your brain! No, until it runs out of battery. So if you're in the
wilderness, you'll run out of battery. I believe that's not the issue with
GSM, but I'm not an electrical engineer.

You're supposed to use Bluetooth, which is also a radio, but it is shorter
range.

FCC fines Verizon for blocking tethering. The issue is one of monopolistic
practices. Telephone service, there aren't many cell phone carriers, as it
should be: you don't want everyone to build redundant cell phone tower
networks. The issue is if you take a natural monopoly (cell phone service)
and turn it into something else (software). This is what got Microsoft in
trouble before (OS -> web browsers). Never understood why that was an
issue, since web browsers are free, and this web browser was never any good
in the first place.

Cell phone providers compete based on the price of their basic plans. And
then you end up paying quite a bit more for addons. One of the addons
Verizon solved was permission to use your smartphone to provide internet
service to your laptop. And they charge \$20 a month (or something like
that) to do that. Apparently they promised that they were not going to
prevent any software to be used on their network, and third parties were
making tethering apps.

FTC proposes tougher kids' privacy rules. Kids' privacy, you understand the
issue: when you put your drunken orgy pictures on facebook, you're supposed
to be adults and get in trouble for it. But when you're a kid, you're not
supposed to know better. So kids need to be protected, and there's various
legislation protecting kids. Sites are supposed to ask for a parent's
permission when asking for personal information. But now third parties can
avoid this parental consent deal (e.g. facebook, twitter).

Pentagon proposes more robust role for its cyber specialists. Namely they
want ability to take action outside of their networks to defend critical
computer systems. Obviously DoD has computer systems and computer
specialists to secure their networks. Obviously a good idea so that people
don't have missiles. Also a number of systems that don't have to do with
defense that are pretty important, like power. So they want the ability to
intervene in the event of cyber-attack for systems they don't own. This is
because they believe their security experts are better than other people's
security experts. This is a problem because it opens the door to the
government mucking around with other people's computers.

Newly discovered malware linked to Stuxnet. Stuxnet was this virus invented
by a combined effort of the military of the US and Israel to destroy the
Iranian nuclear production capabilities. And what the story is about is a
new version thought to be also military, and this one is not trying to melt
things down; it's trying to steal inforamtion, including customer data from
banks. And why is this? They're worried about money-laundering by
terrorists. Their virus programs can't determine ahead of time who's a
terrorist and who isn't. And this is one of the reasons why people are a
little nervous about allowing any expansion of military authorization to
access other people's computers.

Google changes its search formula to allow privacy. I'm sorry, not privacy,
piracy. Google is tweaking its formula to penalize sites suspected of
hosting pirated music, video, games, etc. Google's policy has been that
combating piracy is not their job; their job is to help people find
stuff. Now they're changing their policy. What they're now doing is
tracking takedown notices. The reason why there's this process is because
this stuff is often not put on by the owner, but is user-submitted
content. This is all very interesting because one of the biggest
accumulators of takedown notices is Youtube, and we have yet to see whether
Google is going to stop pointing to Youtube.

Researchers write book using DNA. Pretty recent. Basically, constructed DNA
where sequence encodes the book. This is a denser information-packing
technique. So far, it's really really expensive, so it's not going to show
up in RadioShack just yet, but it's an interesting technology.

Apple patents violated by Samsung. Um, okay. I admit, so am I (re: being on
Samsung's side). Apple has patents not on technology, but on designs. One
of the sillier Apple patents is "rounded corners". There are some other
ones that are a little more serious, like "pinch in to zoom, and pinch out
to zoom the other way". The important thing is not that they're patenting
multitouch screens. That would be a real technological patent. What they're
patenting is a particular use of multitouch screens, where certain gestures
mean certain things. That's called a design patent, and that's more
controversial compared to real technological patents. Apple is trying to
get court to lock the sales of Samsung technology. So if you have a patent,
you can use it to collect royalties from people or prevent other people
from entering the market altogether, and the latter is what Apple seems to
be doing. Really, what they seem to be doing is get rid of Android, one of
their competitors.

This is an example of what we'll be talking about, collected over the last
few weeks. My plan is for everyone to bring in stuff. You are invited, if
you come across a story you think we should know about, to send it in.

I'm going to stop for a moment about administration. Namely, there are two
versions of this course: 195 and H195. We have too many people in both of
them, but especially too many people that want to take H195, and I want to
talk some of you out of it. Usually, if it's too full, I'll just try to get
a larger room. The point of H195 is to get a discussion, and that doesn't
work if we have 50 people in a room. This is the biggest room we could get,
second time around. So here's the deal: H195 is meant for people who have a
real deep interest in the topic and want to be part of discussions and
learn a lot. Unfortunately, it seems that H195 satisfies some breadth
requirement, a provision which I'm going to try to get rid of, but I
haven't gotten rid of it yet. My guess is that some of the people who chose
H195 did so for that reason. So it's more work. And, in fairness to the
people who want to be in it because they want to be in it, I'm going to be
very strict about doing the work. I hope I don't have to resort to things
like quizzes on the reading (because I will if I have to). If you are in
H195, you will have to do twice as much reading, you will have to write one
long term paper, and you will have to actually talk in place. Be at class,
first of all, having done the reading, and participate in discussion.

I'll talk about this on Wednesday for the people who are in H or want to be
in H. If you want to be in H, come on Wednesday and we'll have swordfights
or something.

Reader is at Copy Central. Sadly the Copy Central on Hearst closed, so
you'll have to go to Shattuck Square. Different readers for H and regular 195.

This is a P/NP course. There are good things and bad things from the
student's perspective. The best thing from my perspective (well, from yours
too, I guess) is that you don't feel that you have to agree with me on
things. You'll pass if you do the work. The disadvantage is that not
passing you is a pretty blunt weapon. You'll have to come to class, I will
take attendance (not this time); I hate doing that; it makes me feel like a
third-grade teacher or something. And I've learned that students who are
taking five classes (one of which is P/NP) tend to get caught up in their
162 lab or something.

You're all going to write three papers; if you're in 195, it'll be three
one-page papers on assigned topics. If you're in H, it'll be two of those
and a term paper. The term paper, you'll start by writing a one-page
proposal. Rare that I say "no"; usually I say it's too broad and give some
options.

Will need a bibliography: from the Greek "book", not to be confused with
website. Problem with websites? Anyone can put anything on the web; it
stays there forever even if it's proven wrong. Doesn't get any editing or
criticism prior to publication; tends to be breaking news rather than
later, common analysis. Although websites can be good sources about news
(when it's relevant), it's good when you have some retrospective ideas in
your work as well. Due end of October, and maybe a quarter of them I will
say are fine; the other three quarters you will have to rewrite. So the
term paper's a big deal. Oh yeah, there's a section here called Academic
Integrity. Your part, don't plagiarize; that's easy. My part is, um, trying
to be fair about the ideas I present to you. I don't believe there's any
such thing as neutrality. When people on the TV pretend they're being
neutral, they're lying to you. They have a point of view.

Nevertheless, if everyone seems to be agreeing with me, I'll try to present
the other sides.

The next two pages are events. There's a calendar including assignments and
readings. Things in the reader are supposed to be chronological, but
they're not. The things out of order are marked with an asterisk. The next
thing is an article called the Ethical Context of Computing. It's basically
an overview, and if you look it over, it'll give you an idea of what this
course is about. This isn't an ethics course. An ethics course is "don't
pirate movies" and "don't lie to your boss" and things like that. This is a
course about making you aware about the non-obvious ways that computers
affect our lives.

Most of the time in this class, we're going to be talking about bad
consequences of computing. Going to say at the offset that's not because I
think that computers are all bad; I love what I do. But the good
consequences tend to take care of themselves; the bad ones are more
difficult. Computers in medicine. Wonderful, wonderful things
happen. Looking for ones that are clearly all on one side.

Side comment: you know if you turn a cell phone off, it's not really off?
If you want to keep the government from listening to you, you have to take
the battery out. (Matt: and even then it's got a few seconds of
capacitance).

EFF. What you have here is an issue of their newsletter, which you can get
by mail if you want, or it's on their newsletter. And then you have this
thing in ASCII, not web-looking, and it's called EPIC Alert, from the
Electronic Privacy Information Center. EPIC is a much more narrowly focused
group [than EFF]. Spend their time lobbying on behalf of privacy. It's a
small group; that is to say, it is a large group in the sense that you can
be a member of it and send them money, but it's a small staff, very
focused. They publish this newsletter about specifically privacy issues.

Then there's some stuff from CITRIS, which is a campus group. The Center
for Information Technology Research in the Interest of Society. List of
some projects they work on.

That's the handout, that's the administrative stuff, let me pause for
questions.

Q: Honors reader: same as last semester?
A: Believe so.

Q: Possible to take regular, then come back later to take H?
A: They won't let you, but come talk to me.

Class is bigger than room size. They let you get a little bigger than room
size. Won't be able to get all of you off the waiting list right away. On
Wednesday, I'm going to try to get a better sense of how many are really
going to take H. If you are on the waiting list for H, and you can't get
into H195, you can still probably get into 195.

Wanted to talk about unintended consequences and computers in general, just
for a little bit. It's very very rare that computers raise issues that were
never issues before. What happens is things that were issues all along
become much more important or more pressing or more something. So let me
just take an example. Social security numbers. Your social security number
is a pretty important thing not to get out in the world because of identity
theft. That was always true. But identity theft used to be harder to do,
and the number of cases was much smaller before computers.

But here's another side effect (less obvious). When you buy yourself a
house, that transaction is on the public record. In many (most?) counties,
that record includes your social security number. That didn't matter when
in order to look it up, you had to transport yourself to the county clerk's
office, but these days, they do all that stuff online. So if you're a home
owner, there's a good chance that your social security number is online in
a publicly accessible record. This is one of those disasters waiting to
happen. This is a way computers exacerbate a problem that was around all
along and have unexpected consequences. The public records of deeds is in
many ways a good thing, and was intended to resolve disputes about property
between neighbors. Nobody thought about privacy implications, and when they
put these into computers, nobody thought about the implications, again.

Had they thought about it, when they scanned old numbers, they would have
redacted social security numbers. So that's just a very small narrow
example of the way in which computers amplify issues. It's the same with
almost everything we're going to talk about this semester. I mentioned
earlier the risk of cyber-attacks on power stations. Something you may not
know or care about (but will know anyway) is until quite recently (10-20
years ago), every power distribution facility in the US had the same
lock. Why? Because every once in a while, there's a big power failure, and
it's traditional that the electrical power company areas from neighboring
areas will come into the affected area to help out. They wanted to make it
so someone from the Nevada power company could rush over and get right to
work in a California power substation. They don't do that anywhere because
they started to get security-conscious.

There was never much danger of the Russian army marching in and attacking
our power plants. But there is a danger of some one crazy guy attacking
power plants. So people started thinking about security. What computers do
is make it possible for the crazy guy to not be physically present, and
that's a problem. All semester long, we're going to be looking at
unexpected consequences. In a way, my goal in this class is that when you
go out in the world and build stuff, there won't be as many unintended
consequences because you think about stuff. So that's the goal. It's not to
make you better people; you either are or aren't, and there's not much I
can do about it. But you could be careless in certain ways. I'm sensitizing
you. So that's the purpose of the course.

<a name='2'></a>

CS H195: Ethics with Harvey
===========================
September 10, 2012
------------------

Article from the Washington Post about the process by which the iPhone was
invented, based on internal memos and emails that came out in the Apple
v. Samsung lawsuit. Interesting: author is of view that Apple deserved to
win. What is interesting is the kinds of false starts they made, things
they had to redo, clever ideas. Interesting read.

Civilian "hacktivists" fight terrorists online. About random people who
attempt to infiltrate terrorist organizations online. If I were a
terrorist, I wouldn't be on the web. These guys make up fake identities for
themselves and acquire information they then pass on to the
government. Relevant to today's topic. Constraints on US Gov't that do not
apply to private parties. Police orgs can buy information that they would
not be able to collect themselves. This is not them buying: people
volunteering, but same issue.

What else is new? Bittorrent downloads monitored by copyright
enforcement. They only monitor popular stuff, so if you have obscure
tastes, then you're probably fine.

From Angry Birds to multiplayer video games, NASA ramps up investment in
education technology. They're working on a ten-million massively
multiplayer video game simulating life on Mars. They've already done some
other things in this game area. NASA's interested in education, and the way
to do education effectively seems to be to make games people want to play
(for the game) that are educational. Been done before; mostly bad. You're
playing some adventure game, slashing at monsters, and all of a sudden it
says "what is four times seven?" Interested both in recruiting next
generation of scientists and getting people interested in space to the
point the gov't will spend some money on it.

Internet addiction is real, German Researchers say. Found genetic variation
that might cause it. This is pretty iffy, in my opinion. What might be true
is that there are things in your genetic background that make you more or
less prone to obsessions of whatever kind; that could be true. You can look
it up, but I don't think that the study justified the idea that there's a
special one for internet addiction, but there you have it.

Anti-sec says Apple machine IDs leaked from some company.

That's the news. The topic that we're talking about this week is privacy. I
have to tell you that when I first heard about the topic of privacy on
computers, my reaction was "I don't have anything to hide; why do I care?"
Very valid reaction, some of you are probably thinking that too. So why
should we care about privacy? I want to put aside reasons relating to fear
of identity theft.

One of the things I hope you read this week was the article by James
Rachels. Nobody has nothing to hide -- not even you. You might not be doing
anything to get in trouble, but you may have quirks that you practice in
private (with selected friends).

As we speak, I'm having a little conflict with an administrator (having to
do with 61AS), and the way I talk about it with my colleagues is different
than the way I talk about it to this administrator's boss. It's different
tones: it's not different facts or opinions; it's different tones.

Identity theft: all I'm going to say about that right now: unless you've
looked into it, it's way easier than you think. Researcher at MIT found
that birth date and zip code is all they need to find your medical
records. Can look at anonymized public health data and find you in it.

So. Speaking of medical records, by law, employers are not supposed to use
medical information about you in hiring decisions. There are two reasons
they might want to. One of them is prejudice (so the canonical example is
"you have AIDS", and they think that means you've been behaving sinfully,
and they don't want to hire you, but another is that you might have some
disability that would require special accommodation from your employer that
they might not want to bother with).

Repurposing of information: e.g. Google reading your email to sell you to
advertisers (choosing which ads to display to you). The textbook example of
repurposing that people talk about is around election time, Republicans
make a big issue about welfare fraud. Exists in small amounts. Makes for
good headlines, and so they have these big campaigns to try to catch
welfare cheaters. Back in the 1970s, the state of Massachusetts had the
clever idea of taking their computerized list of welfare recipients and
their computerized list of state employees and doing a merge (checking
which people were on both lists). Found a bunch, but a lot turned out to
not be double-dippers (not working and collecting unemployment), but rather
mistaken matches. Would think that this would not happen, but in fact there
were many people with the same name, or they found some people who used to
work for the state (or used to be on welfare), and just plain wrong
information. Eventually that all got cleared up, but not until after the
state police showed up knocking on people's doors and asking for
information. That's a technical example of what can go wrong with
repurposing information.

Those are the arguments about privacy (why privacy matters) even if you
don't have any secrets. You can get into accidental trouble, can be
discriminated against (for various reasons), and you can be embarrassed for
something turning up in a different context. Happens to people of Harvey's
age who in their youths participated in Usenet. And I know it never
occurred to me in a million years that someone was archiving this stuff,
because something I said forty years ago (online) is still around. Would
have phrased things more carefully if I realized that I was making a
permanent record.

So I want to talk for a minute about the law and privacy. So I should start
by saying I'm not a lawyer, not giving legal advice, etc.

No absolute right to privacy. Cases where various people have legal
authority to look at data you thought was private. Maybe the most obvious
one is if you're suspected of a crime, the police can get a search warrant
to break into your house and look at your stuff, let alone your
computer. But maybe a less obvious case is the one about credit
report. Every time you make a financial transaction, it gets reported to
the credit bureau. Not gov't; it's a private company. I think most people
would say that's a legitimate business purpose.

So. Lots of people can have access to your information for lots of
perfectly good reasons. But in the case of the gov't, there's a long
history of limitations because of the right to privacy in the fourth
amendment. There are some funny exceptions to those limitations. For
instance: you can't be stopped and searched without probable cause, except
that on New Year's Eve, the highway patrol is allowed to stop every tenth
car and breath that student. Result of CA supreme court decision. Can see
purpose of it, but it's a random stop and search.

One that's so common that people don't even think about it any more is the
inspection of your luggage at the airport. The legitimate purpose of that
is people blowing up the airplane, but if they happen to find drugs in your
luggage, the fact that that has nothing to do with terrorism, they can
still arrest you.

The situation is tricky: you can't just say nobody should ever have access
to information about me period. There are many legitimate reasons; that's
why the issue of repurposing is so important. Thought experiment: problem
of terrorists blowing up airports, special team of finding these
terrorists. All they're doing is searching for weapons; they can't do
anything about anything else they find. That would be a way to prevent
repurposing.

When the police have unrestricted power, bad things tend to happen. Privacy
isn't mentioned in the Constitution. It's a judicial construct.

9/11? Massive change to your right to privacy, and not one for the better,
I would argue. Largely to the passing of laws that are not constitutional,
in part due to things that are extra-legal.

Legal to eavesdrop on international calls. Not yet legal to monitor
domestic calls. Law now requires ISPs to make it easy to wiretap a person's
communication.

Some things about the needs that conflict with privacy. Textbook of CS10
(Blown to Bits) starts with a story of a woman who drove her car off the
road, hanging on a cliff (unconscious) for a period of five days because
that's how long it took for the police to get legal access to her cell
phone carrier's information to which cell tower her phone was last in. By
law, if you're an adult, you have to be gone three days before they declare
you a missing person (since maybe you went missing on purpose).

Not a story that happens every day. She lived, by the way. Extreme case in
which privacy conflicts with other needs.

More common thing that conflicts with privacy: most common is just
convenience.

Third parties holding onto your information. Different companies have
different policies. Mostly pretty bad. Google actually is relatively good,
in the following sense: they have fought even subpoenas that they
considered to be overbroad.

During the last big epidemic scare, Google published a map regarding where
there was a big number of search queries of a particular flu. Was very
accurate (week ahead of public health) and was in fact life-saving. Good
use of information where there wasn't any "who made the queries" but rather
just how many.

Two threats to privacy: governments and businesses. Third (recent) one:
individual people with cameras on cell phones.

<a name='3'></a>

CS H195: Ethics with Harvey
===========================
September 17, 2012
------------------

Lawsuit to get records about NSA's surveillance information.
