EE 221A: Linear System Theory
=============================
August 23, 2012
---------------
Administrivia
-------------
Prof. Claire Tomlin (tomlin@eecs). 721 Sutardja Dai Hall. Somewhat
tentative office hours on schedule: T 1-2, W 11-12.
http://inst.eecs.berkeley.edu/~ee221a

GSI: Insoon Yang (iyang@eecs). In Soon's office hours: M 1:30 - 2:30, θ
11-12.

Homeworks typically due on Thursday or Friday.

Intro
-----
Bird's eye view of modeling in engineering + design vs. in science.

"Science":

$$
\mbox{Dynamical system}
	\rightarrow \mbox{experiments}
	\leftrightarrow \mbox{Model}
$$

"Engineering":

$$
\mbox{dynamical system}
	\rightarrow \mbox{experiments}
	\leftrightarrow \mbox{Model}
	\rightarrow \mbox{control}
$$

Control validation, verification, testing.

Broad brush of a couple of concepts: modeling. We're going to spend a lot
of time talking about modeling in this course.

First: for any dynamical system, there's an infinite number of models you
could design, depending on your level of abstraction. Typically, you choose
level of abstraction based on use case. Often, only able to use certain
kinds of experiments. e.g. probing of protein concentration levels. If
you're able to measure just this, then the signals in your model should
have something to do with these concentration levels.

As we said, same phys system can have many different models. Another
example: MEMS device. Can think about having models at various different
models. e.g. electrical model: silicon / electrostatics of the
system. Might be interested in manipulation of the device.

Alt: mechanical model (could have a free-body diagram, e.g.).

Another example: Hubble telescope. Could think of orbital
dynamics. Individual rigid body dynamics. Or properties of the telescope,
the individual optical models of the mirrors and their interactions. The
idea here is to just realize that the word model can mean very different
things. The logical model to use depends on the task at hand. The main
point: a basic tenet of engineering: the value of a model: choose the
simplest model that answers the questions you are asking about the
system. The simplest model that will allow you to predict something that
you didn't build into it.

Predict IO relations that you didn't explicitly design the model on. One of
the properties of a good linear model for a system: it obeys linearity, so
if you form a basis for your domain, then you have the system response to
any input spanned by this basis. Probably the most important thing to take
away from this course: linearity is a _very_ strong principle that allows
us to build up a set of tools.

Time
----

We have this term a "dynamical system". A key part is that it changes with
time, responding with behavior over time. Time will turn out to be quite
important. Depending on how we model time, we can come up with different
variables. We call time (t) a privileged model because it has certain
properties. Namely, when we think about time, we think about time marching
forward (unidirectionality of evolution). Different models: continuous time
($t \in \Re$, could be negative, could go backwards, if we are interested
in backwards evolution), or discrete time $t \in \{nT, n \in \mathbb{Z}\}$,
where $T$ is some sampling time. So in that sense, discrete time, we have
some set. We can also come up with more complicated models of time, like
discrete-time asynchronous. The previous model was some constant period
$T$. In DT asynchronous, we just have a set of points in time. Now becoming
a more important model now with asynchronous processes (react to events
that are going to happen at previously undefined points in time).

Linear vs. nonlinear models
---------------------------

More on this later. Suppose we could take the system, and we could
represent it as being in one of a number of states.

First: suppose a finite number of states (so can be modeled by a FSM),
which represent some configuration of the system. State space represents
states system can be in at any point in time. If state space is finite, we
can use a finite-state automaton. Each state has an output (prints out a
message, or a measurement is taken), and we also consider inputs. The
inputs are used to evolve the dynamic system. Input affects a
transition. We can build up the dynamics of the system by just defining the
transition function.

Packet transmitting node: first state is "ready-to-send"; second state is
"send packet & wait"; and the third state is "flush buffer". If buffer
empty, stay in $q_1$. If not empty, transitions to $q_2$. If ACK received,
then transition to $q_3$ and return to $q_1$. If $T$ time units elapse, we
time out and transition directly to $q_1$. Here, no notion of linear or
nonlinear systems. To be able to talk about linear or nonlinear models, we
need to be able to put some vector space structure on these three
elements. System must then satisfy superposition.

Back to abstract dynamical system (thing we could never hope to model
perfectly): rather than thinking about a set of rules, we're going to think
about a mathematical model. Three classes: CT, DT [synchronous], and
discrete-state (typically finite). Within each of these classes we can
further break each down. For the first two, we can consider linearity, and
we can further break these down into time-varying (TV) and time-invariant
(TI). This course is going to focus just on the linear systems in
continuous and discrete time, both time-varying and time-invariant. We'll
use differential equation models in continuous time and difference equation
models in discrete time. We usually develop in continuous-time and show
analogies in discrete-time.

Analysis and Control
--------------------

Control is pervasive. If you go to any of the control conferences, you see
areas where techniques from this course are applied. Modern control came
about because of aerospace in the 50s. e.g. autopilot, air traffic
control. There the system itself is the system of aircraft. Chemical
process control. Mechatronics, MEMS, robotics. Novel ways to automate
things that hadn't been automated previously, mostly because of a
renaissance in sensing. Power systems. Network control systems: how you
combine models of the system itself with the control models. Quantum
chemistry. Typically, when we think about state spaces, we think about the
state as a vector in $\Re^n$. In many cases, you want to think about the
state spaces as more complicated (e.g. $C^\infty$, the class of smooth
functions).

Difference between verification, simulation, and validation
-----------------------------------------------------------

One of the additional basic tenets of this course: if you have a model of
the system, and you can analytically verify that the model behaves in given
ways for ranges of initial conditions, then that is a very valuable thing
to have: you have a proof that as long as the system adheres to the model,
then your model will work as expected. Simulation gives you system behavior
for a certain set of parameters. Very different, but they complement each
other. Analyze simpler models, simulate more complex models.

Linear Algebra
--------------
Functions and their properties.

Fields, vector spaces, properties and subspaces.

(note regarding notation: $\Re^+$ means non-negative reals, as does
$\mathbb{C}_+$ (non-negative real part)

$\exists!$: exists a unique, $\exists?$: does there exist, $\ni$:
such that.

Cartesian product: $\{(x,y) \vert x \in X \land y \in Y\}$ (set of ordered
n-tuples)
