Input-Output Stability
======================
October 25, 2012
----------------

Think back to LTI systems: consider a system specified by $A, B, C, D$;
assume single-input, single-output; and $D = 0$; $A$ is a diagonal
matrix. We've got a keen idea as to what the solution should look like;
we've seen examples like this before. We've got our system model, and we
have a keen sense as to what the solution is.

IO stability refers to the stability of the system from the point of view
of the input/output relation. If we call the input/output response $H(s)$,
we know that $H(s) = Y(s) / U(s)$, and we know from our Laplace transform
when we were looking at solutions to the time-invariant equation, that this
is equal to $C(sI-A)^{-1}B$. We can write $(sI-A)^{-1}$ by inspection,
since this is a diagonal matrix.

For a multi-input, multi-output system, with $A$ as the same as before, we
still take the Laplace transform; and we now can't just take the same
ratio. The same formulation is still used to compute $H(s)$, which is now a
2-dimensional matrix.

When looking at an I/O relationship, you may not have all of the information
available in $A$ in the I/O relationship because of either how you're
controlling $B$ or how you're sensing: notion of *hidden modes*.

Important when we start thinking about I/O stability.

Consider a system whose output $y(t)$ is characterized by $\int_{-\infty}^t
H(t,\tau) u(\tau) d\tau$. We define $H(t,\tau)$ (the weighting pattern /
function of the system; a matrix for each $(t,\tau)$) and $u(\tau)$, which
are piecewise continuous in $\tau$; require that the integral of the norm
of $H(t,\tau)u(\tau)$ is finite.

For linear time-varying systems, $H(t,\tau)$ is given by the following
matrix: $C(\tau)\Phi(t,\tau)B(\tau) + D(t)\delta(t-\tau)$ ($\delta(t)$ here
is the delta function).

For linear time-invariant systems, it's a little easier: we can do the same
thing, but it simplifies: it only depends (unsurprisingly) on the
difference of $t$ and $\tau$, so we can write it as $H(t-\tau) =
C\exp(A(t-\tau))B + D$ (abusing our notation a bit: to be more precise, we
would then multiply this by a delta centered at $t - \tau$). Then take the
unilateral Laplace transform.

If we have a vector in $\Re^n$, we know that the infinity norm is simply
the max element of a vector. Recall that the corresponding induced norm is
simply the max row sum.

Suppose we have a function $u$; the infinity norm is simply the supremum of
the infinity norm of the resulting vectors. $L_{\infty}^{n_i}$ is simply
the set of functions that are finite over the infinity-norm.

We'll consider a particular case of I/O stability, called bounded input,
bounded output stability.

Bounded Input, Bounded Output Stability (BIBO)
----------------------------------------------

A system ($L$) is said to be BIBO stable very generally if $u \in
L_\infty^{n_i} \implies y(u) \in L_\infty^{n_o}$, or equivalently, $\exists
K < \infty \st \forall u \in L_\infty^{n_i}, \mag{y(\cdot)}_\infty \le
\mag{u(\cdot)}_\infty$.

Equivalently, a system is not BIBO stable if no k exists for this
condition; that is, $\forall k < \infinity, \exists u \st \mag{u}_\infty >
k\mag{u}\infty$.

BIBO stability theorem:
-----------------------

(L) is BIBO stable iff $\sup \int_{-\infty}^t \mag{H(t,\tau)}_{i,\infty}
d\tau < \infty$.

