Infinite Horizon, BIBO for LTI systems, State space stability 
=============================================================
October 30, 2012
----------------

We want to write a function that minimizes the cost function (with $t_0=0$)
$J = \int_0^\infty (y^TQy + u^TRu) dt$. We could consider the first term as
the norm of $\mag{Cx}^2$ and the second term as the norm as $\mag{u}^2$;
$Q, R$ specified by designer; only rule we have to follow here is that $Q$
is positive semi-definite (all eigenvalues are in closed right half plane)
and $R$ is a positive-definite matrix (all eigenvalues are strictly
positive). Typically, Q, R are chosen to be diagonal, since we generally
like to penalize components of the input and output relative to each other.

Penalty on an eigenvector $y_i$ being nonzero is simply the associated
eigenvalue. What's typically important is the ratio of the penalties.

Optimization problem whose constraints are defined by a dynamical
system. It turns out that the optimal input is given by linear state
feedback where the state is multiplied by a matrix $F$ determined by the
system model and the matrices of the cost function: (as seen before): $u =
-Fx, F = R^{-1}B^T P$, where $P$ is the positive-definite solution to the
algebraic Ricatti equation: $PA + A^TP - PBR^{-1}B^TP + C^TQC = 0$. $P \in
\Re^{n \times n}$. Out of all possible inputs, the best one is given by
linear state feedback.

We have some intuition given the linear time-varying case, which is more
complicated; easy to justify through completing the square. Intuition as to
what cost means; now we just need to solve this equation (there's a MATLAB
routine for this, ARE).

If we were to take the derivative of $x^TPx$ ($\dot{x}^TPx + x^TP\dot{x}$)
and integrate it, we get $(x^TPx)(\infty) - (x^TPx)(0)$. Since we defined
$J = \int_0^\infty (y^TQy + u^TRu)dt$, $J - (x^TPx)(0) = -(x^TPx)(\infty) +
\int_0^\infty (y^TQy + u^TRu)dt + \int_0^\infty (\deriv{}{t}(x^TPx)
dt$. From the definition of $\dot{x}$, we can rewrite the derivative. After
some tweaking, $J - (x^TPx)(0) = -(x^TPx)(\infty) + \int_0^\infty (u +
R^{-1}B^TPx)^TR(u + R^{-1}B^TPx)dt$

By our hypothesis, we are assuming that $P$ solves the algebraic Ricatti
equation. We can use that to simplify the equation. If the system under
this control law is stable (exponential, internal stability), then
$x^TPx(\infty) = 0$. If we choose $u = -R^{-1}B^TPx$, then the term under
the integral is 0, and so $J$ is minimized -- cost depends only on initial
state, which you can't affect.

The other thing we talked about was the positive semi-definite solution to
this equation. Has only one positive semi-definite solution (symmetric). We
can also prove that if you choose this control input, then it will
stabilize the system: not only optimal control law, but also stabilizing
control law.

We defined BIBO stability as describing a system in which all bounded
inputs provide bounded outputs.

We get the following theorem: if we write out the transfer function of the
weighting pattern of the system, $\hat{H} = C(sI - A)^{-1}B + D$, which is
a proper matrix, $R = [A,B,C,D]$ is BIBO stable, then the poles are all in
the open left half of the complex plane ($\mathbb{C}^0_-$).

We can ignore $D$ because it's a constant, and so it does not generate (or
cancel) any poles.
