Controllability and Observability of LTI systems
================================================
November 15, 2012
----------------

What does it mean in terms of controlling the state and observing the
system? Controllable and observable subspaces.

Recall: the injectivity of $\mathcal{L}_o$ corresponds to observability,
which relates to the bijectivity of what we called the observability
grammian, $\mathcal{L}_o^*\mathcal{L}_o$,  in our time interval. Suppose
that this is injective. How do we solve for the initial state? What we came
up with last day as finding the inverse of the grammian, i.e. $x_0 =
W_o^{-1} \int_{t_0}^{t_1}\Phi^*(\tau, t_0)C^*y(\tau) d\tau$.

Suppose $y$ is not in the range of this grammian, but our grammian is
injective. What is the "best" estimate of $x_0$? Claim: our computation
from before still gives us the best estimate. What do we mean by best?
We'll explore this.

We've got this map $\mathcal{L}_o$. We can write $y$ to be the sum of two
components, one being in the range of $\mathcal{L}_o$, and the other being
in the nullspace of $\mathcal{L}_o^*$ (recall that we showed that these two
spaces are orthogonal). Therefore we minimize the distance between the
actual initial state and our estimate.

Our third case is that $\mathcal{L}_o$ is not injective, but it is
surjective. $\mathcal{L}_o\mathcal{L}_o^*$ is bijective, therefore. Even
though this is a map between infinite-dimensional spaces, we can define an
inverse because it is bijective.

Our fourth case is that $\mathcal{L}_o$ is neither injective nor
surjective. You can compute how you would find the least-squares estimate
or least norm.

This formulation leads us to the idea of gathering all of the information
about the input and output, and then compute exactly or estimate the
state. Typically, you update your best estimate with some online algorithm.

(derivation of recursive formula, which yields Kalman filter; information
form of the Kalman filter.)

LTI case
--------

Our representation is simply $[A,B,C,D]$. Let's start with
controllability. 
