Controllability and Observability of LTI systems
================================================
November 20, 2012
-----------------

$\{A,B,C,D\}$ is completely observable (note that again, time interval
irrelevant for LTI because integrand of grammian does not depend on $t$)
$\iff$ rank of $\begin{bmatrix} C \\ CA \\ \vdots \\ CA^{n-1}\end{bmatrix}
= n$ $\iff$ rank $\begin{bmatrix} sI - A \\ C\begin{bmatrix} = n \forall s
\in \sigma(A)$.

Same proofs as controllability theorem: instead of considering $\{A, B\}$,
consider matrix pair $\{A^T, C^T\}$.

We call $Q = \begin{bmatrix}B & AB & \hdots & A^{n-1} B \end{bmatrix}$ the
controllability matrix; might also use $\mathcal{C}$. Similarly, we call
$\mathcal{O} = \begin{bmatrix} C \\ CA \\ \vdots \\ CA^{n-1}\end{bmatrix}$
the observability matrix.

We can easily prove the following, but we'll state it as a theorem:

The range of the controllability grammian (does not matter which time
interval, so again we'll consider $[0, \Delta]$) is equal to the range of
the controllability map, wihch is further equal to the range of the
controllability matrix. We haven't shown this directly; however, it is a
direct extension of the proof of the theorems in the controllability matrix
or just a direct extension of the Cayley-Hamilton theorem.

Similarly, the nullspace of the observability grammian is equal to the
nullspace of the observability map (already shown), but that's equal to the
nullspace of the observability matrix. That's in general some subset of
$\Re^n$. If the system is completely observable, the nullspace of these
maps is trivial.

The range of the controllability matrix is the set of all states reachable
from $\theta$; The nullspace of the observability matrix is the set of
unobservable states.

A few definitions:

* $R$ is stabilizable if all of its uncontrollable states are stable.

* $R$ is detectable if all of its unobservable states are stable.

* $R$ is stabilizable $\iff \text{rk}\begin{bmatrix} sI - A & B \end{bmatrix} =
  n \forall s \in \sigma(A) \cap \mathbb{C}_+$.

* $R$ is detectable $\iff \text{rk}\begin{bmatrix} sI - A \\ C
  \end{bmatrix} = n \forall s \in \sigma(A) \cap \mathbb{C}_+$.

Intro to control design via pole placement
------------------------------------------

Using state feedback, when can we place the eigenvalues of the closed loop
system anywhere in $\mathbb{C}$? System must be controllable.
