Physics 112: Statistical Mechanics
==================================
Equilibrium, Thermodynamics, Potential. Feb 10, 2012
----------------------------------------------------

# Midterm
# Equilibrium between two two systems
# Laws of Thermodynamics

At the end of last lecture, we were considering two systems which can
exchange energy, volume, particles. We were asking ourselves what was the
most probable configuration $U_1,V_1,N_1$. $\pderiv{\sigma_1}{U_1} =
\pderiv{\sigma_2}{U_2} \equiv \frac{1}{\tau}$. Similarly,
$\pderiv{\sigma_1}{V_1} = \pderiv{\sigma_2}{V_2} = \frac{p}{\tau},
\pderiv{\sigma_1}{N_1} = \pderiv{\sigma_2}{N_2} = -\frac{\mu}{\tau}$ ($\mu$
for one species) – definitions.

The configuration of maximum probability share the same pressure,
temperature, potential.

The important thing is that the distribution of the system around this most
probable configuration is very peaked and becomes more peaked as we get
more particles (see central limit theorem).

Did not put volume because it is difficult to define walls.

The last point I wanted to make: by putting the system in contact, we have
increased the entropy of the system. That we know from the H theorem.

What Kittel and Kroemer say is approximately correct. "Entropy increases
because most probable configuration by default is greater than what you
started with before". This is approximate because they are speaking about
the most probable configuration.

$\sigma_{\max} < \sigma; \sigma_{\max} \approx \sigma$ (very very close,
though, because our probability distribution is very peaked. This is why
Kittel and Kroemer is merely an approximation)

In practice, it does not really matter, since this is a good enough
approximation for the systems that we work with: $\sigma-\sigma{max} \ll
\sigma = N(\log\frac{n_{Q}}{n}+5/2)$ [Sackur tetrode formula].

Kittel & Kroemer does recognize that, but it is presented in a slightly
confusing manner.

We have shown that indeed the temperature behaves as the temperature we
know. We have not yet shown that this is the same pressure.

Chemical potential affects various things such as rates of
diffusion. Determined by species of particles. However, at equilibrium, by
the H theorem, the chemical potential is equal in all accessible states.

What is chemical potential? It is a measure of the concentration! (verify
by working out $-\tau \pderiv{\sigma}{N}$). A lot of work for a very simple
result. But this is much more powerful. We will use this to look at
batteries, equilibrium in various systems. 

MIDTERM: Friday the 24th. 8:10-9:00. Why Friday and not Monday? Turns out
there is an important workshop on dark matter in UCLA. There is a potential
problem: Monday the 20th is President's day, so no class, no office
hours. Proposition: Tuesday the 21st, we have extended office hours from
4:00-6:00.

Alex's review sessions: Wednesday 15th (5-6), Wednesday 22nd (6-8).

You should take this midterm seriously but not panic too much about it. I
will also give you, next week, maybe before Wednesday, a small diagnostic
quiz that allows you to see where you are.

BACK TO THERMO.

Thermodynamics were developed over a century and a half from the late 1700s
to the early 1900s. Basically, by the beginning of the twentieth century,
there was this concept of three laws of thermodynamics (actually 4: the 0th
law says that at equilibrium, pressure, temperature, chem. potential are
equal).

The first law comes directly from our definition

$d\sigma = \frac{1}{\tau} dU + \frac{p}{\tau} dV -\sum \frac{\mu}{\tau}
dN$. Now, I can multiply by $\tau$ and we get $dU = \tau d\sigma - pdV +
\sum \mu dN$: change in energy = heat - work + chemical work

You can have many different expressions, but basically, this is a
consequence of our definition.

Second law of thermodynamics: when an isolated system evolves from a
non-equilibrium configuration to equilibrium, its entropy will increase.

Third law: entropy is zero at zero temperature (or log of number of states
occupied) ⇒ method to compute entropy.

If there is only one ground state, at zero temperature, all of the
particles will be in this ground state (not fermions) and there is only
one state. $p_0 = 1; p_i = 0 \implies \sigma = 0$. If there are several
ground states, this is degenerate; you will have a $\log g$, where $g$ is
the number of ground states.

Fermions: all of particles cannot be in the ground state. What you should
remember is that at zero temperature, there is one (or several) ways to put
all of the particles.

Thermodynamic identities. Rewrite slides in different ways depending on
what are your independent variables.

How do we measure entropy experimentally? There is a problem with assuming
ideal gas: not valid close to absolute zero. For that matter, Sackur
Tetrode is not valid at absolute zero. The classical approximation breaks
down when $n > n_Q$.
