Physics 112: Statistical Mechanics
==================================
Macroscopic Thermodynamics. Feb 15, 2012
----------------------------------------

Recap of last time: we proved that the internal energy of an ideal gas was
a state variable.

Maxwell relations and their proof: from τdσ = dU + pdV,
	* U = U(σ,V) ⇒ dU = τdσ - pdV
	  + Internal energy
	* H = H(σ,P) ⇒ dH = τdσ + Vdp
	  + Enthalpy
	  + H = U + PV
	* F = F(τ,V) ⇒ dF = -σdτ - pdV
	  + Helmholtz free energy
	  + F = U - τσ
	* G = G(τ,P) ⇒ dG = -σdτ + Vdp
	  + Gibbs free energy
	  + G = U - PV + τσ

exact differential: f = f(x,y) ⇒ df = (∂f/∂x)dx + (∂f/∂y)dy.

For an ideal gas, we found C{p} - C{v} = k{B}N{A}. But C ≡ dQ/dt. If Q or T
were exact differentials, regardless with which path they took, we should
have had the same dQ/dT. The same for work because the first thermodynamic
law combines heat and work, and energy is an exact differential.

∂τ/∂V = -∂p/∂σ
dU = τdσ - pdV. U ⇒ dU = (∂U/∂σ)∂σ (∂U/∂V)∂V.

A necessary condition for an exact differential is that the derivatives
commute. In other words, _take the curl_.

More relations:

∂τ/∂V = –∂p/∂σ
∂τ/∂p =  ∂V/∂σ
∂σ/∂V = –∂p/∂τ
∂σ/∂p = –∂V/∂τ

We just get these from various formulations of first law of thermo (U, H,
F, G): by virtue of being exact differentials, their derivatives commute.

General relations for the specific heat:

C{V} = (∂Q/∂τ){V} = T(∂σ/∂τ){V}
C{p} = (∂Q/∂τ){p} = T(∂σ/∂τ){p}

Thus C{v} = C{p} + τ(∂σ/∂P·∂P/∂τ)

\alpha ≡ 1/V ∂V/∂τ. "volume coefficient of expansion"

κ ≡ -1/V ∂V/∂p "isothermal compressibility"

Therefore C{p} - C{v} = Vτ(\alpha²/κ)

What's needed to calculate entropy

Use the relations shown in the previous part. All we need are C{v} and
equation of state. But C{v} is also computable using equation of state at a
given V₀.

σ(τ,V) = σ(τ₀,V₀) + ∫C{v}(τ′,V)dτ′/τ′ + ∫dV′(∂P{v}(τ₀,V′)/∂τ)

Same for internal energy.

dU = C{v}dτ + (τ∂P/∂τ - P)dV
∂U/∂τ = C{v}
∂U/∂V = τ∂P/∂τ - P.

Example van der Waals gas (particle interactions):
(P + a/v²)(v-b) = k{B}N{A}τ (v ≡ V/ν
