Physics 112: Statistical Mechanics
==================================
Chemical Potential. Feb 27, 2012
--------------------------------

Conference result (dark matter): unfortunately a negative result. A number
of groups (two in particular) claimed that they saw signals that could be
the result of WIMPs which are responsible for dark matter. MACHOs were
bad.

What we have done so far is referred to the microcanonical method (the name
does not matter). Basically, we have been counting states. With the
postulate of the H theorem, this allowed us to define entropy as $-\sum_i
p_i \log p_i$. ( Various reminders of definitions of temperature, pressure,
chemical potential. )

The system $S$ is in one state of energy $\epsilon$. How does the number of
the states in the reservoir evolve as $\epsilon$ increases? Since the two
systems are isolated, the total energy of the system is constant. As one
increases, the other decreases. Energy is directly proportional to the
number of states and inversely proportional to the probability of being in
a state.

Now we are equipped to derive the Boltzmann distribution.

We know that the number of states is $g_{R}(U_0 - \epsilon)$, where $g_R
\equiv (U_0 - \epsilon)^{3N/2}$.

$$
= A(U_0 - \epsilon)^{3N/2}
\\ = AU_0^{3N/2}(1-\frac{\epsilon}{3N\tau_R/2})^{3N/2}
\\ \Rightarrow AU_0^{3N/2}e^{-\epsilon/\tau_R}
$$

Configuration that we are looking at: state of the system
$S$.

$$Pr[S \in \epsilon ] \propto g_R(U_0 - \epsilon)$$

\begin{align}
\frac{Pr[S \in \epsilon_1]}{Pr[S \in \epsilon_2]}
= \frac{g_R(U_0 - \epsilon_1)}{g_R(U_0 - \epsilon_2)}
\\ = \frac{\exp(-\sigma_R(U_0-\epsilon_1))}
{\exp(-\sigma_R(U_0-\epsilon_2))}
\\ = \frac{\exp(-\frac{\epsilon_1}{\tau})}
{\exp(-\frac{\epsilon_2}{\tau})}
\end{align}

$$
Pr[S \in \epsilon] = \frac{e^{-\epsilon/\tau}}{\sum_s e^{-\epsilon
s/\tau}}
\\ (z \equiv \sum_s e^{-\epsilon s/\tau})$$

$z$ is known as the partition function.

So let me take a two-level system, where state 1 has $\epsilon = 0$, and
state 2 has energy $\epsilon$.

So the probability of being in state 1 is $\frac{\exp(-0/\tau)}{1 +
\exp(-\epsilon/\tau)} = \frac{1}{1 + \exp(-\epsilon/\tau)}$.

Likewise, the probability of being in state 2 is $\frac{\exp(-\epsilon/\tau)}{1 +
\exp(-\epsilon/\tau)} = \frac{1}{\exp(\epsilon/\tau) + 1}$.

As I increase the temperature, I can excite the system, and at some
temperature, the two states are equiprobable with 50%. 

The second example we will take is the Maxwell distribution, where a
particle in a gas in contact with a reservoir (which can be the rest of the
gas). To be continued on Wednesday.
