Physics 112: Statistical Mechanics
==================================
Boltzmann Distribution. Feb 29, 2012
------------------------------------
5.1 Constant number of particles
================================
Boltzmann factor
----------------
Recall: two-state system, we could write down the Boltzmann
distribution. Note that heat capacity will peak when there is a maximum
change in state ($C_V = \pderiv{Q}{T} = \pderiv{U}{T}$.)

Let's go back a bit and try to understand where this equation is coming
from. Why does the probability that S in a quantum state energy $\epsilon$
decrease exponentially with $\epsilon$? As you increase $\epsilon$, since
the total energy $U_R$ is fixed, the energy and number of states in the
reservoir decrease (conservation of energy).

* Examples

Free particle at temperature $\tau$. Assumption: no additional degrees of
freedom (no spin, not a multi-atom molecule).

$\text{Pr}[dV , p+dp, d\Omega] = \frac{\sum \exp(-p^2/(2M\tau))}{Z}$

That's where we're using our recipe (result that we derived before) that
the density of states in phase space is merely $\frac{1}{\hbar^3}$. So the
number of states in a differential volume element is $\frac{dV d^3p}
{\hbar^3}$. Define $d^3p \equiv p^2 dp d\cos\theta d\phi$ (further defining
$d\Omega \equiv d\cos\theta d\phi$, where $\Omega$ is the solid angle
moment), i.e. convert to spherical coordinates. The above probability thus
reduces to $\frac{1}{Z} \exp(-p^2 /(2M\tau)) \frac{dV p^2 dp d\Omega}
{\hbar^3}$.

Normalizing to N particles (i.e. choosing $Z$ such that this sum is 1)
yields $f(v)dv d\Omega = n\left(\frac{M}{2\pi\tau}\right)^{3/2}
exp\left(-\frac{Mv^2}{2\tau}\right)v^2 dv d\Omega$. Note that $\hbar^3$
disappeared entirely. Important distribution, Boltzmann (we often call it
the Maxwell distribution).

Why does the Maxwell distribution have a $v^2$ term? It's a result of the
Jacobian matrix, which effectively tells us that the density of quantum
states per unit velocity interval in the system $S$ goes to zero as $v^2$
when $v$ goes to zero. Only works when the reservoir is very big relative
to the system. Cannot possibly be from the normalization, since this is a
function of $v$.

Notice that the slope of $f(v)$ is zero at $v=0$, whereas the slope of
$f(\epsilon)$ is $\infty$ at $v=0$.

Why doesn't the system S stay in a state of energy $\epsilon$? Continuous
exchange between $S \leftrightarrow R$ of excitations of energy
$\tau$. Thoughts: Uncertainty principle technically governs everything, but
that's not particularly useful. Each excitation in the reservoir will have
a typical energy $\approx \tau$. Thermal fluctuations of the order of
\tau. Difficult to get. $\epsilon \gg \tau$, $\text{Pr}[\epsilon]
\propto \exp(-\epsilon/\tau)$

With an electron cloud (since those are fermions), you have some more
complicated physics going on, but you have a Fermi gas, and you will be
exchanging energy on the order of $\tau$. In a crystal or a solid, you will
exchange phonons with energy on the order of $\tau$. Regardless of what
system you have, you are exchanging quantum energy packets on the order of
$\tau$.

Partition  function
-------------------
$Z = \sum_s \exp(-\epsilon_s/\tau$. Let's see, then, that we can compute
that. We can ask ourselves, what is the mean energy of the system? $U =
\avg{\epsilon} = \sum_s \frac{\epsilon_s e^{-\epsilon_s/\tau}}{Z}$. But
look, think about what $\pderiv{\log Z}{\tau}$ will look like.

Aside: we still have time to do the entropy.

$\sigma = -\sum p_s \log p_s = -\frac{\sum
e^{-\epsilon_s/\tau}}{Z}\left[-\frac{\epsilon_s}{\tau} - \log z\right]$.

What you see is just $\sum \frac{1}{\tau}\frac{\epsilon_s e^{-\epsilon_s
/\tau}}{Z} + \log Z = \frac{U}{\tau} + \log Z = \pderiv{\tau\log Z|}{\tau}$

$F = U - \tau\sigma = -\tau\log Z$.

[ done for the day. Fairly powerful tool. ]

Ideal gas (again!)
------------------
 * Entropy = Sackur-Tetrode formula

5.2 Exchange of particles
=========================
Gibbs factor
------------

Grand Partition Function as a calculation tool [ Gibbs Sum (grand canonical methods) ]
-------------------------------------
A very powerful tool. More technical, but important.

5.3 Fluctuations
================
