Physics 112: Statistical Mechanics
==================================
Ideal gas, Gibbs distribution: Mar 5, 2012
------------------------------------------
Ideal Gas
=========

We previously focused on the partition function, which is $\sum_s
e^{-\epsilon_s/\tau}$. This so-called "canonical" method is much simpler,
usually, than counting states with the constraint that energy is fixed. So
that's the advantage of that method, and so, from the partition function by
appropriate derivatives (usu. of the log), you can get all the quantities
that you like (energy, entropy, free energy, chemical potential, pressure,
and so forth).

If I have $N$ systems, $Z = (Z_1)^N$ (if the systems are distinguishable),
and $Z \approx \frac{(Z_1)^N}{N!}$ if the systems are indistinguishable. We
discussed last time why this is an approximation: sparseness of states.

For the ideal gas, we found that $Z = Vn_Q$, where $n_Q\equiv \parens{
\frac{M\tau}{2\pi\hbar^2}}^{3/2}$. This is $\approx \frac{1}
{\lambda^3}$. So this is really a quantum density satisfied by putting
particles a wavelength apart, and I cannot do much better than that.

If I apply the Gibbs recipe there, what I get is that $Z_N =
\frac{1}{N!}\parens{Vn_Q\right}^N$. So $\log Z_N = N\log(Vn_Q) - \log N!$. We
use the Stirling approximation to say $\log N! \approx N\log N - N$. Thus
$\log Z_N = N\log(\frac{n_Q}{\frac{N}{V}}) + N = N\log \frac{n_Q}{n} + N$.

When we introduce free energy, we have $F = -\tau\log Z$; $p =
-\pderiv{F}{V}$; $\sigma -\pderiv{F}{\tau}$.

Barometric equation
-------------------
Assume the atmosphere has constant temperature. How does the density
decrease with altitude z? The way the book does it is $\mu = \const$, since
we are in thermal equilibrium. But $\mu$ has two pieces: the internal
chemical potential ($\tau\log\parens{\frac{n}{n_Q}}$) and external chemical
potential, which is just the potential in the gravitational field, namely
$mqz$. This has to be constant, which implies that $n = n_0\exp\parens{
-\frac{mqz}{\tau}}$.

The problem with this derivation is that it is at a very high level. We
need to invoke the chemical potential. Very similar problem to density of a
centrifuge, or density of ions in the membrane of a cell.

This is one way of doing things. There are actually two other ways of doing
things.

Single-particle occupancy of levels at different altitude
---------------------------------------------------------
Instead of considering the atmosphere to be in equilibrium, I would
ask myself (the more intuitive way of doing it), what is the probability
that a given molecule is at the altitude $z$? I (Sadoulet) would say that
$\epsilon = \epsilon_k + mgz$ (energy is kinetic energy + potential
energy). The probability of being at the altitude $z$ would be proportional
to $\exp\parens{-\frac{\epsilon_k + mgz}{\tau}}$. The density, therefore,
has to be proportional to $\exp\parens{-\frac{mgz}{\tau}}$.

The problem with these two derivations is that they do not generalize very
well to the point where you are not in equilibrium.

Hydrodynamic equilibrium
------------------------
The third way of doing it (which you have likely done in Physics 7) is to
consider a slab of thickness $dz$ and consider the hydrodynamic
equilibrium. The force pushing up on this slab is $pA$, whereas the force
pushing down on the slab is $(p + dp)A$. Our slab has a certain mass and
particle density, and so the downward force (due to gravity) is $nmAz
g$. Putting that all together, we have $pA - (p + dp)A = nmgzA$. This leads
directly to $\frac{1}{n}\deriv{p}{z} = -mg$. This is totally general. If we
have $pV = N\tau$, $p = \frac{N}{V}\tau = n\tau$. Since $\frac{\tau}{\p}
\deriv{p}{z} = -mg \iff \frac{1}{n} \deriv{n}{z} = -\frac{mg}{\tau} \implies
p \sim \exp\parens{-\frac{ngz}{\tau}}$. This generalizes to the case when
the temperature is not constant.

(various clicker questions)

Grand partition function: $\sum_{S,N} \exp\parens{-\frac{\epsilon(N) - \mu
N}{\tau}}$

Gibbs Distribution
==================
Exchange not only energy, but also particles.
