Physics 112: Statistical Mechanics
==================================
Gibbs Distribution: Mar 7, 2012
-------------------------------
The mathematics of the Gibbs distribution is not difficult so much as
complicated. What is difficult is determining what phenomena this
explains.

$$\prob{S \in \epsilon_s(N_s), N_s} \propto g \propto \exp
\parens{-\frac{\epsilon_s(N_s)}{\tau}} \exp\parens{\frac{\mu}{\tau}}
\\ = \frac{1}{z} \exp\parens{-\frac{\epsilon_s - \mu}{\tau}}
\\ z \equiv \sum \exp\parens{-\frac{\epsilon_s - \mu}{\tau}}
$$

We call this the Gibbs distribution (z is, as we recall, the grand
partition function).

Often, chemists prefer to consider chemical potential $\lambda_i \equiv
\exp \parens{\frac{\mu_i}{\tau}}$. 

This is weak interaction. What it means is that as we keep adding particles
at the quantum level, we don't change the wave function. They don't care
how many particles are in the system.

Often, we will simply use $\prob{\epsilon_s} = \frac{1}{z}\exp \parens
{-\frac{(\epsilon_s - \mu)N}{\tau}}$.

A common problem with this distribution, by the way, is that we are
extremely general, and sometimes it is difficult to know what this
represents in practice, so we should take examples and try to think about
the examples to consider what these mean in practice.

Maybe the simplest example I can take is a Fermi-Dirac distribution. Let us
consider an energy level $\epsilon_s$, and I have a fermion, which has a
half-integer spin, e.g. an electron (spin $\frac{1}{2}$). If we listen to
Pauli, at most one fermion can occupy each state.

Therefore $N_s \in \{0,1\}$. $\prob{N_s=0} = \frac{1}{z}$; $\prob {N_s=1} =
\frac{1}{z} e^{-(\epsilon_s-\mu)/\tau}$. So $z = 1 + e^{-(\epsilon_s-\mu)/
\tau}$. Plugging this back in, we have $\prob{N_s=0} = \frac{1}{1 + e^{
-(\epsilon_s-\mu)/ \tau}}$; $\prob {N_s=1} = \frac{ e^{-(\epsilon_s-\mu) /
\tau}}{1 + e^{-( \epsilon_s-\mu)/ \tau}} = \frac{1} {e^{( \epsilon_s -
\mu)/\tau} + 1}$. Examples: gas absorption: heme in myoglobin, hemoglobin,
walls. Energy bands of materials (bandgaps).

Determining $\mu$, when considering hemoglobin and stuff. All we need is
the density of $O_2$ in the blood. So how can we compute this? Remember
what we said about mass action law. If we are a dilute system of particles,
they will have the same properties as the gas: they will barely interact
with each other, so states will be independent, and we can then apply the
ideal gas approach.

We can also apply this to our dissolved gas, and $\mu_{gas} = \tau\log
\frac{n}{n_Q}$. This is an ideal gas in the sense of weakly-interacting
n-body system.

Chemists and biologists like to put the pressure, since the partial
pressure is something you can measure easily. Langmuir adsorption isotherm:
$f = \frac{p}{\tau n_Q\exp\parens{\frac{\epsilon}{\tau}} + p}$.

Aside: Pauli was an enormous guy, German/Swiss physicist. Very bright but
very unforgiving. Lack of understanding: not a question.

Adsorption: fraction occupied $= f$. Same form as Fermi-Dirac. Adsorption
dependence on $\mu$ can clearly be observed to be positive: as $\mu$
increases, the fraction of occupied sites increases. However, as $\tau$
increases, the fraction of occupied sites decreases. (binding energy:
$-\epsilon$)

Ionized impurities in a semiconductor: K&K p370. Doping. Donor: tends to
have one more electron; acceptor: tends to have one fewer electron. $\mu$
(Fermi level) determined by electron concentration in semiconductor.
