Physics 112: Statistical Mechanics
==================================
Kinetic Theory 1 / Probabilities. January 23, 2012
--------------------------------------------------
Details:
 * clickers
 * homework -- due in LeConte reading room
 * webcasts
 * Discussion sections

Ideal Gas
 * particle interaction leads to thermal equilibrium.
 * particle probability distributions are independent
 * particle systems where interaction time ≪ mean free time between
   collisions

Motivations: statistical mechanics and fluctuations
===================================================
The need for statistical mechanics
----------------------------------
How to describe large systems.
------------------------------
 * very large
 * at finite temperature – not at rest
   + velocity v ≈ 300m/s @ 300K.
 * Constant collisions
   + mean free path λ ≈ 0.1 μm.
 * Probabilistic description. 1 particle
   + Classically
	 - Have to track both position and velocity/momentum.
	 - We will introduce a phase space. The probability distribution
	   on phase space = position × momentum.
	 - Problem is that states are treated as continuous.
   + Quantum – states are actually discrete / countable.

N particles
-----------
In many cases it is a good approximation to treat particles as
independent. We will call this an ideal gas.

Temperature, pressure, entropy
------------------------------

Temperature as a measure of mean energy of excitations of the
system. Two reasons: 1) usually more degrees of freedom than spatial
degrees of freedom (spin (e.g. ferromagnetism), and 2) other effects:
quantum gas: Fermi-Dirac exclusion principle (i.e. we cannot put two
particles in the same state) means that we have to stack in
energy. Their mean energy is very large, even at 0K.

Pressure as a measure of energy density or "average" force per unit
area on walls of container.

Entropy as a measure of the state of disorder of a system. Modern
definition: σ = -∑pi log(pi). 0 if in one state, max if flat
distribution.
