Physics 112: Statistical Mechanics
==================================
Gibbs Grand Partition Function: Mar 9, 2012
-------------------------------------------
Gibbs grand partition function, fluctuations, what is minimized when a
system is in thermal equilibrium with a bath?

Next midterm is Monday, March 19.

I would like to move the third midterm from April 20 to April 13 for two
reasons: one, it's a week before we finish; two, allows me to go to a small
workshop in Davis. Interesting workshop, announced at last minute, purpose
is to try to understand what the LHC tells us about dark matter.

There was an announcement by Fermilab that they may have seen the
Higgs. CERN might have seen the Higgs. Not convinced by announcements so
far: more publicity than anything else.

Let's go rapidly through the grand partition function. Remember, we were
speaking of a system, which was exchanging with a reservoir both energy and
particles. What we had shown was that $\prob{\epsilon_s(n)} = \frac{1}{z}
\exp (-\frac{\epsilon-\mu N}{\tau})$, $z = \sum_{s,N} \exp(-\frac{\epsilon
- \mu N}{\tau})$. In most cases, we'll have $\epsilon_s(N) = \epsilon_s
N$. So that's the Gibbs formalism. Almost exactly in the same way as in the
Boltzmann formalism, we can deduce a number of things about the derivatives
of the log of this partition.

For instance: taking into account one species, $\avg{N} = \sum_{s,N}
\frac{1}{Z} N\exp (-\frac{\epsilon_s(N)-N}{\tau})$. See, if I were to take
$\pderiv{\log Z}{\mu}$, I would have $\sum_{s,N} \frac{N}{\tau}\exp (-\frac
{\epsilon_s(N)-N}{\tau})$. And so $\mu = \tau\pderiv{\log Z}{\mu}$.

So let's take two examples: Fermi-Dirac distribution.

Fermions versus bosons: fermions have half-integer spins, follow
Fermi-Dirac distributions; bosons have integer spins, follow Bose-Einstein
distribution.

So in the Fermi-dirac, we have $\avg{N} = \tau \pderiv{\log Z}{\mu} =
\frac{\exp(-(\epsilon-\mu)/\tau)}{1 + \exp(-(\epsilon-\mu)/\tau)} =
\frac{1}{\exp((\epsilon-\mu)/\tau) + 1}$.

Bose-Einstein: $z = \sum_N e^{-\frac{(\epsilon-\mu)N}{\tau}}$. You
recognize this is a geometric series and is thus equal to
$\frac{1}{1-\exp(-(\epsilon-\mu)/ \tau)}$. $\avg{N} = \tau\pderiv{\log Z}
{\mu} = \frac{\exp((\epsilon-\mu)/\tau)}{1 - \exp((\epsilon-\mu)/\tau)} =
\frac{1}{\exp((\epsilon-\mu)/\tau) - 1}$

Note that as $\epsilon-\mu \to 0$, this quantity diverges: Bose-Einstein
condensation. On the other hand, for a Fermi-Dirac distribution, this
converges to 1.

Just pay attention to $\sigma = \sum_{s,N}p_{s,N}\log p_{s,N}$. I will put
into this expansion my Gibbs factor $\frac{1}{Z}\exp(-\frac{-\epsilon_s(N)
- \mu N}{\tau})$.

$$
\log z + \sum_{s,N} p_{s,N} \frac{\epsilon_s(N)}{\tau} - \sum_{s,N} p_{s,N}
\frac{\mu N}{\tau}
\\ = \log Z + \frac{\avg{\epsilon_s}}{\tau} - \frac{\avg{N}\mu}{\tau}
\\ = \pderiv{\tau\log Z}{\tau}
$$

You have to be careful. The formulae are different with the grand partition
as opposed to without the partition function. $\Omega \equiv F - \sum_{\mu_i}
\avg{N_i} = -\tau\log Z$.

Note that $\sigma = \pderiv{\tau\log Z}{\tau}$ while $\Omega = -\tau\log Z$
as a result of the thermodynamics identity.

Fluctuations
------------
Actually, we started to speak about what I am going to say. There are
fluctuations when we are exchanging particles or energy with the
reservoir. The number, the energy is not fixed, and if I am exchanging
particles, they fluctuate. I told you about the mean number of particles
there; we spoke before abotu the mean energy. But now we can try to compute
the variance (or root-mean-square/standard deviation) of this quantity.

For instance, you remember that for a Boltzmann distribution (not
exchanging particles, so I don't need the grand partition function),
$\avg{E} = \tau^2\pderiv{\log Z}{\tau}$. The variance, you should remmeber,
is simply $\sigma_E^2 = \avg{E^2} - \avg{E}^2 = \sum \epsilon_s^2
e^{-\epsilon_s/\tau} - \parens{\sum \epsilon_s e^{-\epsilon_s/\tau}}^2$. If
you differentiated this expression with respect to $\tau$, you got this
expression, which was this elegant, if not beautiful formula $\avg{N} =
\tau\pderiv{\log Z}{\mu} = \tau^2\pderiv{\log \avg{E}}{\tau} = \tau^2
\pderiv{\tau^2 \pderiv{\log Z} {\tau}}{\tau}$.

So $\sigma_N^2 = \avg{N^2} - \avg{N}^2 = \tau \pderiv{}{\mu}
\parens{\tau\pderiv{\log Z}{\mu}}$.

Let me quickly do my calculations for my Fermi-Dirac and Bose-Einstein
distributions, considering $\sigma_N$. So I have to take $\sigma_N^2 =
\tau\pderiv{\avg{N}}{\mu}$. So for Fermi-Dirac, we have $\frac {e^
{(\epsilon -\mu)/ \tau}}{e^{(\epsilon-\mu)/\tau} + 1} = \avg{N}(1-\avg{N})$.

Note that the variance is actually less than $N$, so less than the Poisson
distribution.

If I were to do the same thing for the Bose-Einstein distribution, I would
get $\avg{N}\parens{1 + \avg{N}}$. So the fluctuations at N = 0 are
absolutely enormous.

So we say that the Bosons like to travel in flux.

Physicist joke: astronomers are fermions, particle physicists are bosons.
