Physics 112: Statistical Mechanics
==================================
What is Minimized; Black Body: Mar 12, 2012
------------------------------------------
Housekeeping
============
Remember that we have a midterm next Monday. Some material is in the
book. The next midterm would be Friday (April 13/14, depending on which is
Friday).

Today, office hours moved to 1:30-2:15. Review session on Saturday.

What is minimized?
==================
Would like to start by asking you a question: in the conditions we have
been speaking about (system s in contact with reservoir), exchanging only
energy, does it go to a state of minimum energy? No; remember the constant
exchange of energy (constant kicking, so to speak).

Contrary to a system which is able to lose energy to vacuum, Does not
evolve to state of minimum energy. Contrary to an isolated system, does not
evolve to a configuration of maximum entropy (entropy of combination of
reservoir and system is maximized).

Evolves to a configuration of minimum Free Energy ("balance between
tendency to lose energy and to maximize entropy")

Landau Free Energy & Enthalpy
-----------------------------
More rigorously: We cannot defint he temperature of the system out of
equilibrium. So we introduce $F_L(U_S) \equiv U_S \tau_R\sigma_S(U_S)$
(Landau Free Energy; constant volume) and $G_L(U_S, V_S) \equiv U_S
\tau_R\sigma_S(U_S,V_S) + p_RV_S$ (Landau Free Enthalpy; constant
pressure). The difference between ordinary free energy and the Landau free
energy is that the ordinary free energy is a function of the system $S$
that is only defined at equilibrium, whereas Landau Free Energy is defined
everywhere.

What we want to show that this $F_L$ is the value that is maximized. We can
simply count states.

$\sigma_{tot}(U_S) = \sigma_R(U-U_S) + \sigma_S(U_S) = \sigma_R(U) -
\pderiv {\sigma_R}{U}U_S + \sigma_S(U_S) = \sigma_R(U) - \frac
{1}{\tau_R}U_S + \sigma_S = \sigma_R(U) - \frac{1}{\tau_R}F_L(U_S)$

The most probable configuration maximizes $\sigma_{tot}$, which minimizes
$F_L$. Note that this implies that $\pderiv{F_L(U_S)}{U_S} = 0 \iff \pderiv
{\sigma_S(U_S)}{U_S} = \frac{1}{\tau_R}$ (by the definition of Landau free
energy).

When minimized, temperature of system is equal to temperature of reservoir.

Landau Grand potential
----------------------
If we exchange particles, what is minimized is $\Omega_L(U_S,N_S) \equiv
U_S - \tau_R\sigma_S(U_S,N_S) - \mu_R N_S$ (the Landau Grand Potential).

This will be useful when we do phase transitions. They get interesting in
statistical mechanics, and people are using this Landau Free Energy.

Aside
=====
This completes the material for the midterm. Since I do not like to
emphasize memorization, this time is that you get two pages (one sheet
double-sided) of notes of formulae. The main thing is not the formulae, but
rather how to apply them. So many formulae now that if you apply them now,

Black Body radiation
====================
Let us begin with the Planck distribution.

Usual way to consider a gas of photons in thermal equilibrium. (take
$\omega \equiv 2\pi v$) Let's think of it in a single mode of cavity, and
consider the number of photons in that mode. Harmonic oscillation:
$\omega$. If I have s photons in this mode, the energy would be $\emf
\equiv s\hbar\omega$; $s \in \mathbb{Z_+}$. So $Z = \sum_s e^{-s\hbar\omega
/ \tau}$, roughly. So $\avg{S} = \frac{\tau^2}{\hbar\omega} \pderiv{\log Z}
{\tau} = \frac{e^{-\hbar\omega/\tau}}{1 - \e^{-\hbar\omega/\tau}} -
\frac{1}{\e^{\hbar\omega/\tau} - 1}$. So $\avg{\emf_\omega} = \frac{\hbar
\omega}{e^{\hbar\omega/\tau} - 1}$

Two quantifications: first quantification (wave-like): discrete states in
massive particles; obvious cavity modes for photons. The second
quantification was of discrete particles: it was reversed -- it was obvious
that massive particles were quantized as discrete particles, but not so
much that photons were quantized in numbers -- Planck.

Questoin: why is the mean energy per mode decreasing with energy? For
$\hbar\omega > \tau$, it is more nad more difficult for the bath to create
a photon: I need $\hbar\omega$ to create a photon, and if it's too large, I
don't have enough energy available.

Photon properties. Maxwell equations in vacuum.

Mean energy density: Is $\hbar\omega$ the mean energy density as a function
of frequency? No; we have to fold in the frequency density of the modes
$D(\omega)d\omega$ which can be computed with our $\frac{1}{h^3}$ rule.

The density of states is $2\frac{d^3xd^3p}{h^3}$. (2 is the polarisation
factor) Note that $pc = \hbar\omega$, and $d^3p = p^2 dp d\Omega$. So our
density is $\frac{2d^3x(\hbar\omega)^2\hbard\omegad\Omega}{c^3\hbar^3}$. We
can use the fact that $\hbar^3 = \frac{1}{8\pi/3}$. If we are not
interested in the direction of the photons, we integrate on solid angle and
we get $u_\omega d\omega = u_vdv = \frac{\8\pi hv^3dv}{c^3(\exp(hv/\tau) -
1)$. I would like you to be able to derive this from first principles,
rather than rote memorization.
