Physics 112: Statistical Mechanics
==================================
Black Body: Mar 14, 2012
========================
Office hours: today from 3:30-4:30; extra at Friday from 3-4.

Review Saturday @ 10:30.

Black Body
=========
Radiation energy density between $\omega$ and $\omega+d\omega$? 

Would like to rederive black-body law in a slightly different way. Recall:
speaking of photons in equilibrium with a metallic cavity. In that case,
the average number of photons at frequency $\omega$ is $\frac{1}{e^{\hbar
\omega/\tau} - 1}$. The minus is coming from the fact that we have a boson,
the spin of which is 1. Some of you are more comfortable with $\nu = \frac
{\omega}{2\pi}$, in which case the energy is $\frac{1}{e^{\hbar
\nu/\tau} - 1}$.

We can write $u_\nu(\nu,\theta,\phi) 2\frac{d^3xd\nu d\Omega}{h^3} =
\avg{s}h\nu 2\frac{d^3xd^p}{h^3}$ (we need to pull out this factor of two
to account for the polarization). We can then use that $p = \frac{\epsilon}
{c} = \frac{h\nu}{c}$. If I'm not interested in the direction, I have to
integrate over the angles, which gives me a factor of $4\pi$, and so our
net result is $u_\nu(\nu)d^3xd\nu = \frac{8\pi h\nu^3d\nu d^3x}{c^3(e^{h
\nu/\tau}-1)}$

Cosmic microwave radiation
--------------------------

Example of most perfect black body that we know: photons in equilibrium in
early universe. In the early universe, the tempmerature was over 3000 K. We
had mostly $p + e^-$ at that time. The mean free path was very low; protons
interacting with electrons. So what you had was a plasma; effectively
opaque to photons -- very high scattering. At about 3000 degrees, universe
then becomes transparent: hydrogen forms, and photons don't scatter.

So all around us, we see this radiation (discovered in the 60s), and it is
no longer at this temperature. The radiation has been shifted and is now at
about 3K -- in microwave band; roughly mm wavelength.

Difficult to make black body radiator to calibrate instrument: primary
limiting factor.

Fluctuations of temperature are $10^{-5}$ of mean temperature. You can
measure these as frequencies. You get this marvelous spectrum with wiggles,
and we see the plasma vibrating, in some sense. This gives us a lot of
information: tells us that the universe is especially flat; tells us the
amount of protons and neutrons in the universe; tells us the amount of dark
matter.

Allows us, for instance, to look at a lot of cosmology parameters.

We can also measure polarization; gravitational potential waves shaking
this plasma.

These fluctuations are (difficult to prove) responsible to the formation of
structure: they are responsible for the formation of galaxies.

European satellite this year named Planck, which will achieve more accurate
results.

Could lecture for over ten hours on this subject, but that is not the
subject of this class.

Planck
======

Before: physicists only considered continuum. We did not know about the
second quantization, that photons come with energy $h\nu$. Physicists of
19th century just wrote the partition function, summing over states. If you
do this, you get $\tau/\epsilon_0$, independent of frequency. The mystery
was you had to sum over modes (frequencies), and you'd get infinity. This
is a problem.

Planck introduced the quantization of states. Planck did not clearly
understand what he was saying. The photons comes in quanta of $\hbar
\omega$. Thus there is a cut-off at $\epsilon=\tau$, and so you do not have
what was called the ultraviolet catastrophe. This was 1903.

In 1905, Einstein published two articles, one which was about this
commenting on how quantization explains the photoelectric effect -- this is
why he got his Nobel prize. The same year he also published his paper on
special relativity, and so he did not have to work an 8-5 job.

Have we solved everything?
--------------------------
No: zero point energy. We have again an infinite sum. This is related to
the problem of the vacuum energy, dark energy, and the cosmological
constant.

Namely, $\epsilon_\omega = \frac{\hbar\omega}{2} + s(\hbar \omega )$. This
is related to what we consider vacuum energy, dark energy (maybe), and the
cosmological constant.

Note: important to sum instead of integrate.

Let me try to ask you why we did not use the Gibbs formalism? Photons
appear and disappear in interaction with cavity. However, this is a
different formula.

The reason why we do not use this is that the chemical potential of the
photon must be zero. Why? Special case of mass action law; entropy of the
reservoir does not change when we change the number of photons (keeping the
energy constant); and the photons is its own antiparticle.

Namely: $\mu_\gamma + \mu_e - \mu_e = 0 \implies \mu_y = 0$; $\pderiv
{\sigma_R}{N_{\gamma BB}}\bigg|_U = -\frac{\mu_\gamma}{\tau} = 0$. And
finally $\gamma + \gamma \leftrightarrow e \bar{e}$. We will see that the
chemical potential of the antiparticle is the same as that of a 

It is perfectly fine to use the Gibbs formalism; it is just that
$\mu_\gamma$ is zero.

Theme of this course: there are often three different ways of deriving the
same result: microcanonical (counting states), canonical (Boltzmann), and
grand canonical (Gibbs formalism).

Counting number of states: Kittel and Kroemer go through a painful counting
of number of states using quantum numbers. Of course, same result.

Flux through an aperture. Do not forget cosine factor: volume of oblique
cylinder is $cdtdA\cos\theta$.
