Physics 112: Statistical Mechanics
==================================
Black Body: Mar 16, 2012
========================

As usual, housekeeping. Then comments on grand partition function. And then
we will come back to the black body approach and finish the
Stefan-Boltzmann law, speak about Kircchoff.

Wednesday moving again office hours: going to SF to participate in a
roundtable discussion between artists and scientists on the concept of
space: "how do we know that things we don't see exist?" (i.e. dark matter,
dark energy). The thing is very strange (suggested by an artist) is that
the main question is about creativity. Important for scientist, yes, but
this is not useful for invisible space; we do not create things; we are
forced to believe these things.

There has been some confusion regarding the grand partition
functions. $\frak{Z} = \sum_s e^{-\frac{\epsilon_s(N_s)-\mu
N_s}{\tau}}$. We have been using this primarily for a system of one state
$\epsilon_i$. In this case, the partition function $\frak{Z}_i =
\sum_{N_i} e^{(\epsilon_i-n_i)N_i/\tau}$. Then, we get similarly that the
average number of particles of this state is $\tau \pderiv{\log \frak
{Z}_i}{\mu}$.

Thus if we have a system with all possible states, $N = \sum \avg{N_i} =
\sum_i \tau \pderiv{\log\frak{Z}_i}{\mu_i}$. Therefore $\avg{U} =
\sum_i \tau\epsilon_i \pderiv{\log\frak{Z}_i}{\mu}$.

However, we could also approach this by considering our system to be an
ensemble of states from the start. In order to specify this, I must
specify the number of particles that have specific energies.

Rather, $\frak{Z} = \sum e^{-\frac{\sum \epsilon_i N_i - \mu\sum
N_i}{\tau}} = \prod_i(\frak{Z}_i)$.

We can then explore a bit: $\avg{N} = \tau\pderiv{\log \frak{Z}}{\mu} =
\sum_i \tau\pderiv{}{\mu}\log z_i$ (after some simple arithmetic
manipulations)

By the way, if you do it either way, you have no problem with the
distinguishability of the various states. You take that into account
automatically.

Note that this is different from the case where the system is an ensemble
of particles.

Recall: flux through an aperture requires us to integrate over an oblique
cylinder, which has area $cdtdA\cos\theta$.

$u_\omega(\theta,\phi d\omega d\Omega = \frac{\hbar\omega^3d\omega}{\pi^2
c^2(\exp(\hbar\omega/\tau) - 1)}$. This is the energy density of photons
moving in the direction $\theta, \phi$. If I'm interested in the flux
density, i.e. the brightness, there I am just looking at what happens
taking a unitary $dA$ perpendicular to the direction. We consider
$I_\nu(\theta,\phi)d\omega d\Omega dt dA = \frac{\hbar\omega^3
d\omega}{\pi^2 c^2(\exp(\hbar\omega/\tau) - 1)} cdt dA$. $I_\nu$ is just
$\frac{2h\nu^3d\nu dt dA}{c^2(\exp() - 1)}$.

With a fixed aperture, $J_\nu dA dt d\nu = \int \frac{2h\nu^3
d\nu}{c^3(\exp() - 1)} cdtdA\cos\theta d\Omega$. We have to be careful
here: we do not integrate beyond $\frac{\pi}{2}$, since those photons are
going the wrong way -- the only photons that go through the aperture are
moving toward the aperture.

So what we have finally is $\frac{4\pi h \nu^3 d\nu dtdA}{c^2(\exp(h\nu /
\tau) - 1)} = \frac{c}{4} u_\nu d\nu dA dt$. Note here that $u_\nu$ is the
energy density integrated over the solid angle.

Therefore if I am interested in the total energy in my volume, I will
integrate $\int u_\nu(\theta,\phi)d\nu d\Omega dV = \int \frac{8\pi h\nu^3
d\nu}{c^3(\exp(h\nu/\tau)-1)} = \frac{8\pi V}{h^3 c^3} \int_0^\infty
\frac{\tau^4 x^3 dx}{\exp(x)-1}$. The total energy, therefore, goes as $a_B
T^4\; a_B = \frac{\pi^2 k_B^4}{15\hbar^3 c^3}$.

Similarly, if you were to look at thte total flux through a fixed aperture,
we will do the same calculation, but now what we will get $J =
\frac{c}{4}a_B t^4 = \sigma_B t^4$.

You can also get the entropy and the number of particles by just
integration. For entropy, you can either integrate $d\sigma/d\tau$ or just
remember the density of states, which goes as $T^3$, as does the number.

Why do we have a $T^4$ for energy density but a $T^3$ for entropy or number
of photons? By the way, entropy is proportional to number of photons, which
makes sense. Mathematically, this appears as a result of change of
variables. So what is the effect that dominates? It is the increase of the
density of states with energy. Density of states goes as $\omega^2
d\omega$, which comes directly from the counting of states. Since $\omega$
is of the order of $\frac{\tau}{\hbar}$, we get here that the number goes
as $T^3$. Of course, when I'm looking at energy, I have one extra factor of
temperature ($\tau \equiv k_B T$), and that's where $T^4$ comes in.
