Physics 112: Statistical Mechanics
==================================
Black Body: Mar 21, 2012
========================
Overview
========
Black body: Detailed balance, Kirchhoff laws

Midterm on the fifteenth. No homework due on thirteenth.

As mentioned last week, cannot be at office hours this afternoon, going to
SF for panel discussion between artists and scientists about space and the
unknown. Instead, I would like to propose office hours on Friday 3-4.

Examining of histogram. Happy about no very low grades; 7.5 points lower;
smaller spread.

There are still people in the class writing something like $\mu =
\pderiv{\sigma}{N} = \pderiv{U}{N}$ without putting any indication of what
the independent variables are. The second type of problem which seems
serious are confusions. One of these is that between isolated systems and
systems in contact with a bath. Of course, at equilibrium, the probability
of a given state is $\frac{1}{g_i}$ (H theorem), and in the second case,
they are not equiprobable and are given by the Boltzmann distribution (or
Gibbs).

Also, people assuming everything is an ideal gas. Don't do that. Putting
random formulae shows that you don't understand the problem, so you'll lose
points.

Statistical mechanics is much bigger than just **classical** ideal
gases. And it's much more than Thermodynamics identity. Those are
distortions of coming from Physics 7; you tend to write the Thermodynamics
identity over and over; we have much more powerful ways to do things: we
can compute entropy from first principles. And then people use $dU = \tau
d\sigma - pdV + \mu dN$, but people without a lash will put $U =
\tau\sigma$. Reverse-engineering, it does not work.

Also, we'll use the best two midterms out of three.

For these things, any questions? Alex has the midterms, and I will have
them on Friday.

Black Body
==========

We are in black body radiation. What I would like to focus on today is heat
imbalance. We have actually a very specific black body radiator, which is a
cavity with metallic walls. We were thinking about the modes in this cavity
and the photons in thermal equilibrium. Now, what we will do is put another
system in communication with this cavity and ask ourselves: what is the
radiation of this cavity? (these two systems are at the same temperature
and communicate through an internal aperture)

Suppose that first that the second system is a black body. By this, we mean
something that absorbs all radiation. So a cavity with a very small hole is
a very good approximation for a black body: if I send a photon into this
hole, it will not come back.

Can imagine more black bodies -- what we use in our field: rubber with a
lot of carbon in it (does not reflect, only absorbs).

By construction there, if we have these two systems communicating, the
energy emitted by one is the energy absorbed by the other.

First question, which is very simple: how does the energy emitted by system
1 compares to energy absorbed by system 1? Since they are at the same
temperature, the energy emitted by either system is the same (consider
formula derived last lecture).

**Principle of detailed balance**. Consequence: the spectrum of radiation
emitted by a black body is the "black body" spectrum calculated before.

This is a very simple argument, but very powerful. Proof: $\frac{c}{4}A
u_{BB} = \frac{c}{4}Au_{cavity} \implies u_{BB} = u_{cavity}$. Emits in an
isotopic way exactly as the cavity. We could have inserted a frequency
filter or a direction selector, and these still remain constant.

Let's modify the situation. Instead of a black body, let's consider a grey
body, and let's define an absorption coefficient $a \equiv \frac {\text
{power absorbed}}{\text{power received}}$. In principle, this could depend
on angle and frequency. So the question now that we ask ourselves is how does
the energy of a grey body compare to energy emitted by a black body?

For this, we must consider both the reflected BB energy and GB emission by
walls.

Notice that the energy received by the black body is $(1 - a)(BB) + a(BB) =
BB$. Emission coefficient = $e = \frac{\text{power emitted}}{\text{power
black body}}$. $a = e$ -- usually known as Kirchhoff law. The black body
receives back exactly what it emits. Therefore its temperature stays
constant.

Very useful in many applications. At the basis of the Nyquist noise or
Johnson noise. We will come back to this. You can show that the amount of
power emitted $U d\nu = 4kTRd\nu$. This is explained not very well, I'm
afraid, in Kittel and Kroemer, but this is the cause for many sources of
noise in our electronic circuits. More specifically, a theorem known as the
dissipation/noise theorem: any system capable of absorbing radiation is
making noise: if it absorbs radiation and has constant temperature, it will
have to emit *something* to stay at constant temperature. This is deeply
ingrained in quantum mechanics: anything that absorbs emits.

In order to detect anything, we absorb energy. And because we absorb
energy, we must emit energy.

There are many applications. Let me just give you an orientation. In many
cases, in all the sensing applications, we can say that we are at least
roughly a black body radiator, which has a certain surface area $A_e$, and
we are looking at it with some sort of telescope with a certain reception
area $A_r$. There is a simple relationship if the distance is $d$. The
source is seen from the receptor to fill a solid angle $\Omega_r$, which is
basically, for small angles, just $\theta^2$. Similarly, the solid angle as
seen by the emitter is $\Omega_e = \frac{A_r}{d^2}$; likewise, $\Omega_r =
\frac{A_e}{d^2}$, and so if you take the ratio of the two, you have
$\frac{\Omega_e}{\Omega_r} = \frac{A_r}{A_e}$. Purely from geometry, but an
important result.

If we have something that is diffraction-limited, then $\Delta \theta \sim
\frac{\lambda}{R}$. This means that $\Omega_r \approx \Delta\theta^2 \sim
\frac{\lambda^2}{R^2}$. Since our area goes as $\pi R^2$, $\Omega_r A_r =
\lambda^2$. With these two sets of equations, we can look at various
situations in astronomy. We'll do that rapidly at the beginning of next
lecture. I will also probably speak about phonons on Friday, and we'll see
if we can start the Fermi-Dirac/Bose-Einstein.
