Physics 112: Statistical Mechanics
==================================
Black bodies and phonons: Mar 23, 2012
======================================

What I would like to do today, if you've looked at the homework for next
week, is finish black body radiation -- in particular stars -- and to speak
of phonons in a crystal. So, uhm, let's start with a simple question: a
star like the sun is to a first approximation a black body. Is the
radiation across the disk constant, brightening at the limb, or dimming at
the limb?

Experimentally, it looks constant, roughly. Why is this?  This is coming
from the fact that for black body radiation, the radiation is
isotropic. When we ask ourselves what is the amount of light that reaches
our photodetector in a time $dt$, this is basically $u(\nu, \theta, \phi)
d\nu d\Omega dA cdt$.

So if I take my sun, essentially what is happening is that I am looking at
a radiation shell of thickness $cdt$.

So that's one way of thinking about it: does not depend on angle. Another
way of considering it: area $dA$. Whatever emerges from this area is
independent of the angle. What I receive in my eye is not proportional to
$dA$ but rather $dA\cos\theta$ ($\cos\theta$ is normal to my line of
sight).

So apparent radiation is constant all over the disk, if I have a black
body, which is radiating isotropically, where I am not depending on
$\theta$ and $\phi$. That is why the disk of the sun is basically constant
luminosity, the moon is constant luminosity.

Why are we considering the sun a black body? The black body occurs in
thermal equilibrium when the photons (of a star), at least those very close
to the edge, are scattering so much that they are in thermal
equilibrium. Basically, this is coming from the fact that the photons are
scattering very much. It is not an exact black body for the following
reason: the sun is surrounded by its corona. When photons are coming
through that region, they are absorbed at certain frequencies. We have
absorption line at certain frequencies. By the way, that's how we
discovered helium: absorption lines we had no idea existed; was discovered
by looking at the sun through a spectrograph.

Essentially, that's a black body: photons in equilibrium.

Maybe 10 years ago, there was a professor from Ohio State (or something
like that) who published a full-page ad of the New York Times (which was twice
his monthly salary) how people talking about the Big Bang don't understand
anything about anything. Whole argument was that since this is not coming
from an oven with a small hole, this was just silly. Argued that stars were
not black bodies.

It shows you that people can get very emotional spending twice two months'
salary on a full-page ad in the New York Times.


Now, an interesting question is: what happens if the sun in practice is not
also a black body with very defined edges? The density in the sun goes down
as the radius increases; one over the mean free path does something like
$\rho\sigma$. The emissivity of the sun, therefore, as a function of
radius, is 1 very close to 0, and dies off at some point. This leads to
limb darkening. And by looking precisely at the intensity as a function of
the radius, you can have an idea of the mean free path, and of therefore
the density. That is how we mapped the density at the edges of the sun.

If $u$ (energy density) is a function of the radius, then $cdt$ at the
edges has more energy than $cdt$ at the edges. There is a whole field of
stellar astronomy devoted to this kind of stuff.

So any way. This kind of simple question (why the sun appears to be of
constant luminosity despite it being a sphere) is interesting and not
totally trivial to answer. Related to the isotropic behavior of the black
body.

Solid angles and surfaces at emission/reception
-----------------------------------------------

Showed last time these simple geometric relationships. The one at the
bottom is related to refraction and comes from the fact that the angle
$\theta_D$ at some radius R goes as $\frac{\lambda}{R}$. So the solid angle
goes as $\frac{\lambda^2}{R^2}$, and the area of my detector goes as $\pi
R^2$,and so $\Omega_r A_r \sim \lambda^2$.

This has an interesting consequence. Suppose that I am looking at a totally
diffuse object, e.g. the microwave background. If I have a
diffraction-limited telescope, how does the radiation I receive depend on
the diameter of my telescope? (i.e. how does the received energy depend on
the diameter of a diffraction-limited telescope?) Does it increase or stay
constant?

It indeed stays constant, for the following reason: the portion that I see
of this diffuse object is my $\Omega_r$. Therefore the area at emission is
just $\Omega_r d^2 = A_e$. Now whhat is received is also proportional to
the solid angle of my telescope, i.e. $I_\nu d\nu \Omega_e A_e$. So that is
equal to $I_\nu d\nu \frac{A_r}{d^2} \Omega_r d^2 = I_\nu d\nu \lambda^2$.

If I am looking, however, at a point object (i.e. something significantly
small), that is not correct. That is why astronomers go for very large
telescopes; to capture as much light as possible.

So if you have a diffuse emitter, it [increasing area] does not change the
power. Size of microscope is not important in terms of power, but is
definitely important if you're trying to look at ripples from fluctuations
in temperature of microwave background. Larger telescope means more detail,
better angular resolution.

This leads to a number of interesting results. For instance: if the sun is
a black body, the amount of radiation that I get in my telescope is a
measure of its diameter. More exactly, apparent diameter (i.e. diameter
divided by distance) of the star. So let's take a star that emits power
(absolute luminosity) $L$ isotropically. If I am now trying to look at the
apparent luminosity $\ell$, this is $\frac{\text{Power received}}{\text{Area
of telescope}}$. Since our object is much smaller than the telescope, this
does depend on area of the telescope. This is the apparent luminosity. I
can compute that and say "look, my star is emitting a power L over the
whole $4\pi$ solid angle, so over my unit solid angle it emits
$\frac{L}{4\pi}$. So what do I see? $\frac{L}{4\pi}\frac{A^2}{d^2}$. So
$\ell = \frac{L}{4\pi}\frac{1}{d^2}$. So for a black body, $L = 4\pi r_e^2
\sigma_B T^4$. That's my Stefan-Boltzmann law. So $\ell = \frac{4\pi
r_e^2}{4\pi d^2} \sigma_B T^4 = \expfrac{r_e}{d}{2}\sigma_B
T^4$.

There are a number of objects that are vibrating or exploding (so they are
changing their diameters and often also their temperatures). So we can do
the same thing with supernovae. If we look at $\deriv{\ell}{t}$, we have
two terms: $\frac{2 r_e \deriv{r_e}{t}}{d^2}$ and $\frac{r_e^2}{d^2}
\sigma_B 4T^3 \deriv{T}{t}$. We can measure both of these changes over
time, so now if we make a spherical approximation, I can get
$\deriv{r_e}{t} = \deriv{r_\perp}{t} = \deriv{r_\parallel}{t}$. We can
measure this last derivative by Doppler shift. If we assume that, then we
can measure the distance. And that is how we measure distance to stars that
are too far to see parallaxes and how we are able to measure the expansion
of the universe.

Pretty clever method. It relies on this assumption, which if a star is
vibrating, is not an unreasonable assumption. It is a much less rigorous
assumption if you have an explosion, since stability varies.

We used this method for supernova 1987A to check that it was indeed (at the
same distance as) the Magellanic cloud.

Another little thing that radio astronomers do is related to the antenna
temperature. This is very simple, actually: $I_\nu d\nu dA d\Omega =
\frac{c}{c^3}\frac{2h\nu^3 d\nu}{e^{h\nu/\tau}-1}$. If $\frac{h\nu}{\tau}
\ll 1$, $e^{h\nu/\tau} - 1 \sim \frac{h\nu}{\tau}$. so this goes to
$\frac{\tau}{c^2} \nu^2 d\nu dA_e d\Omega_e$. If our telescope is
diffraction-limited, then we know that this is roughly $2\tau
\frac{\nu^2}{c^2} d\nu \lambda^2$. So $I_\nu d\nu dA d\Omega \sim 2\tau
d\nu$, which means that the amount of power received by my telescope is
$2\tau d\nu$ (independent of area of object since this is a diffuse object,
and we are diffraction-limited). So the amount of power received is just
$\tau$; $k_B T$. Antenna temperature is just amount of power at low
frequency.
