Physics 112: Statistical Mechanics
==================================
Phonons, Quantum gases: April 2, 2012
=====================================

We have the third midterm a week from Friday. It will cover material up
through Friday's lecture.

So, phonons are vibrations in a crystal and are quantized. This means that
as before, $\epsilon_1 = \hbar\omega$, and $\epsilon_\omega =
\avg{s_\omega}\hbar\omega$. If you look at the dispersion relations,
plotting energy and momentum, $\omega, k$ (proportional by a $\hbar$
factor), in crystals there are three acoustic modes. To a first order, they
are linear at very low energy.

We will make some approximation, forget that they are of different
velocities, and just consider all the photons to have the same velocity. So
we will say the energy $E = p c_s$. Typically, this velocity is of the
order of a few kilometers per second, which is roughly $10^{-5}c$. There is
one detail we need to take into account: a crystal is not a continuous
medium. If I'm speaking of transverse phonons, I can move the atoms
transversely, and this corresponds to a certain wavelength and
momentum. It's clear that wavelengths that are too short are equivalent to
a much longer wavelength: you forget about the oscillations between the
particles. Thus $k = \frac{p}{\hbar} \le \frac{a}{\pi} = k_D$. There is a limit
which is $\frac{\hbar\pi}{a}$, which is called the Debye limit. The viable
region, therefore, is known as the Brillom zone. The corresponding
frequency is $\omega_D = \frac{a}{\pi}c_s$.

One way of thinking about it: suppose I have a crystal with N atoms, each
of which can move in three directions. I therefore have 3N degrees of
freedom. So the sum from 0 to the Debye limit of my density of states,
multiplied by the three polarizations, has to be equal to 3N. If you work
out the computation (done in the notes, with spherical approximation), we
get $c_s (6\pi^2 \frac{N}{V})^{1/3}$. This is slightly different from what
you should get, but this is merely a result of the spherical approximation.

The thing you just should remember is that there is a limit in the energy
up to the momentum due to the fact that this is not a continuous medium.

So: is the Debye temperature $\theta = \frac{\hbar\omega_D}{k_B}$ useful?
Evidently not. In the case of photons, I will get the mean occuplation
number as $\frac{1}{\exp(\hbar\omega/\tau) - 1}$. These are bosons, and
chemical potential is zero because they can disappear at the walls. If I
have a small temperature, I will excite low-energy phonons. At low
temperature, same results as the black body but replacing $c$ by $c_s
\approx 10^{-5} c$. In particular, $U = 3\int d^3 x \int_0^{p_D} \frac{d^3
p}{h^3} \frac{1}{\exp(\hbar\omega/\tau) - 1}$, and I will have a similar
result where $U$ goes as $T^4$, except we have three degrees of freedom as
opposed to two, and the velocity is different. $C \propto \frac{1}{c_s^3}
T^3$, $\sigma \sim \frac{1}{c_s^3} T^3$, $\avg{N_p} \sim \frac{1}{c_s^3}
T^3$. What you can show easily (which I will not do in detail) is that $U
\propto N\expfrac{T}{T_D}{4}$, and that $C \propto \expfrac{T}{T_D}{3}$.

Consequences: with a very small heat capacity, we can measure very small
energies with large temperatures.

We are sensitive enough to measure the difference in temperature of the
crystal when we look at some very distant, very faint radiation. These are
among the most sensitive instruments you can imagine, and this is because
the heat capacity plummets at very low temperatures. Okay, so probably
enough. The phonons behave essentially exactly as the photons. The velocity
of sound is roughly $10^{-5} c$, and there are three polarizations. Else,
almost everything else applies. The fact that we have a limit in the
momentum of the phonons due to the fact that the crystal is not continuous,
is irrelevant at low temperatures.

Do the calculation once; nothing is difficult.

Let us speak about quantum gases. This is the last chapter, which is really
at the core of the course. So let's just summarize what we did: we
basically started from the H theorem (microcanonical methods of counting
states). We can physically deduce all of thermodynamics. But you would
agree that counting states (especially when you impose restrictions) is
actually not very easy. So there was the trick that Boltzmann had invented,
which was to put the system in equilibrium with a reservoir. The whole
ensemble (reservoir + system) was isolated. We could apply once and for all
the microcanonical method, and we got that the probability of a certain
state of energy was $e^{-\epsilon/\tau}$.

We could generalize this with Gibbs if the number of particles was not
constant, i.e. the grand canonical method, where the probability of states
goes as $e^{-\frac{\epsilon-\mu}{\tau}N}$. What we then derived (either
from Boltzmann or Gibbs) was the black body radiation, where the average
number of photons $\avg{s}$ was $\frac{1}{\exp(\hbar\omega/\tau) - 1}$. I
would now like to use this method, but for particles where $\mu \neq 0$. So
we derived that the mean number of particles in a state of energy
$\epsilon$ was $\frac{1}{\exp((\epsilon-\mu)/\tau) \pm 1}$. Remember that
fermions don't blow up at $\epsilon - \mu = 0$.

There is something we will speak about, the Bose-Einstein condensation,
which is due to the fact that this fraction actually diverges.

skip density of states. How do we determine chemical potential? We compute
the mean number of particles. How do we compute this number? Integrate the
product of the average value with the density of states.
