Physics 112: Statistical Mechanics
==================================
Fermi-Dirac/Bose-Einstein: April 4, 2012
========================================
No housekeeping.

Focus on density of states to be sure that this concept is ingrained in
your minds by now. Focus on Fermi-Dirac and basically what we will see is
that normal operating temperatures, $\tau \ll \mu$. There are a number of
interesting approximations we can make which allow us to make these
calculations.

Once again: recall that the minus sign in the Bose-Einstein distribution is
responsible for the Bose-Einstein condensation, which we will cover. There
is no divergence for the Bose-Einstein distribution because $\mu$ is
slightly negative, so we don't have to worry about the case where they are
equal.

Density of States
=================

We have $\avg{s(\epsilon)} = \frac{1}{\exp\parens{\frac{\epsilon -
\mu}{\tau}} \pm 1}$. What we have to do is sum over $g_i \avg{
s(\epsilon_i)}$. As we get further, the density of states increases. In
that case, we can replace this sum with an integral approximation (in
particular at small energy): $\int_0^\infty g(i) \avg{s(\epsilon)} D(s)
d\epsilon$. For Fermi-Dirac it does not matter much (since there are few
states of small energy, but Bose-Einstein it will matter. Therefore this
only holds for large $\epsilon$.

We know that in phase space, the number of spatial quantum states
(orbitals) is $\frac{d^3 x d^3 p}{h^3}$. I will need to multiply by some
kind of degeneracy factor $g$ (e.g. number of spin states: for an electron,
this would be equal to 2).

In order to go to $\epsilon$, I will have to integrate over space and the
angles and make the change of variables from p to $\omega$. Thus we have
$\frac{g}{h^3}\int_{\text{space}} d^3 x \int_{\text{angles}} p^2 dp d\Omega
= \frac{4\pi g V}{h^3}p^2 dp = \frac{gV p^2 dp}{2\pi^2 \hbar^3}$. Now we
must distinguish between two cases.

Non-relativistic ($\epsilon = \frac{p^2}{2m} \implies p =
\sqrt{2m\epsilon}$). Most of literature does not put volume in density of
states, since that is a trivial factor in front.

We can replace our $p^2$ by $2m\epsilon$ and $dp$ by $\sqrt{\frac{m}
{2\epsilon}}$, so we now have $D(\epsilon) d\epsilon = \frac{g}{4\pi^2}
\expfrac{2m}{\hbar^2}{3/2} \sqrt{\epsilon} d\epsilon$. If in two
dimensions, instead of $p^2 dp$ we would have $pdp$, which means that it is
constant.

In general, we are relativistic, and so $\epsilon = \sqrt{pc^2 +
m^2c^4}$. If we are ultrarelativistic, $\epsilon = pc$. If you do the
calculation for the ultrarelativistic case, it goes as $\epsilon
d\epsilon$.

Recall: we determine $\mu$ by computing the mean number of particles.
That is, $V\int_0^\infty \avg{s(\epsilon)} D(\epsilon d\epsilon$ (with this
convention). It does not really matter; just stick to _one_ convention. The
number of states is always proportional to the volume: comes from the $d^3
x$.

One interesting thing is that this gives us in the limit of small
occupation number the result of the Boltzmann distribution. In the case
where $\epsilon - \mu$ close to 0, then we have degeneracy, and this is a
fully quantum gas.

Number of particles is just a sum over energies of occupation number
multiplied by density of states (as we've determined previously). SO that's
a way you can determine $\mu$: $\mu(\tau)$ is set by the requirement that N
is the total number of particles. ($\neq$ black body $N_\gamma \alpha
\tau^3$ -- you will have to do this integral using ultrarelativistic density
of states).

The energy is also triial to get: $U = \avg{\epsilon} = V \int_0^\infty
\frac{\epsilon D(\epsilon) d\epsilon}{\exp\parens{\frac{\epsilon -
\mu}{\tau}} \pm 1}$. You will get the classical case only if you neglect
the $\pm 1$.

The entropy is not a particularly useful expression, except that for
Fermi-Dirac, it only appears in the region of the chemical potential and
goes back to zero. There is no disorder where $\avg{s} = 1$, and there is
no disorder in states that are empty. This is a theme with Fermi-Dirac: all
the action is around the chemical potential.

Similar things happen for the Bose-Einstein, but we'll come back to that.

So: for Fermi-Dirac, for $\tau = 0$, we have a perfectly square
distribution. In that case, we can trivially do the calculations: $N = V
\int_0^\mu D(\epsilon) d\epsilon$.

Let's first consider a nonrelativistic gas. In that gas, $D(\epsilon) =
\frac{g}{4\pi^2} \expfrac{2m}{\hbar^2}{3/2}\sqrt{\epsilon}d\epsilon$. I can
put that back into our expression, and we get $VA \frac{2\mu^{3/2}}{3}$.

$\mu(\tau = 0) = \epsilon_F = \text{Fermi energy}$. This goes as $\expfrac
{N}{V}{2/3} \equiv n^{2/3}$. If you take the density of free electrons in a
metal, $\epsilon_F \sim 5\text{ eV} \to \sim 4 \cdot 10^4 \text{ K}$. By
the time I am finished, I am obliged to require my electrons to have a
fairly large energy. Velocities on the order of $.003c$. This is just a
result of the Pauli exclusion principle. This I would like you to know
this. As a consequence, $4 \cdot 10^4 \gg \text{ lab temperature}$. This
approximation is quite good, in practice. So we are very close to a square
distribution.

So once I have the chemical potential, I can compute the energy, $U =
\int_0^{\epsilon_f} \epsilon D(\epsilon) d\epsilon$. I will have to
integrate $\epsilon^{3/2}$, so, if you do the math, this will give
$\frac{3}{5} N \epsilon_F = F$ -- no disorder. I can laso compute $p =
-\pderiv{F(\sigma, \tau, V)}{V} = \frac{2}{5} n \epsilon_F$ ($\sigma = 0$,
constant $\tau$).

If you are ultrarelativistic, you can do the same calculation, but you get
different coefficients and formulae. Does not matter; these are the same
idea. too many electrons in a white dwarf reaches this ultrarelativistic
limit. Becomes unstable; will collapse. Similarly for neutron stars.

Interpretation
==============
Pauli exclusion principle. Must apply Heisenberg uncertainty principle,
large relative momentum, since position is constrained to within this
lattice.

$\mu$ does not change very much with temperature, but it does change. The
distribution rounds off. Reason for slight decrease in 3 dimensions:
density of states increases with energy. When we are rounding the
distribution, what is happening is that in the tail, we have more states
available, and therefore the contribution to the integral is larger.

Origin of thermocouple effect.
