Physics 112: Statistical Mechanics
==================================
Fermi-Dirac/Bose-Einstein: April 6, 2012
========================================
Once again, no special announcements. Midterm in a week. I will tell you
during this lecture or the next lecture where the mditerm finishes.

What we will speak first about is holes and electrons. More precisely,
hole-electron excitations.

Then we will get into crystals and speak about metals and heat capacity of
metals.

So that's the program for today.

The discussion we had at the end of the last lecture applies to not just
fermions, but any particle with half-integer spin. Cannot have more than
one particle per quantum state.

Fermi energy: ~5eV in a metal. Much much bigger than temperature in normal
conditions. To a first order, this is a square distribution ($\mu \gg
\tau$). Therefore when $\epsilon < \mu$, $\avg{s(\epsilon)} = 1$; when
$\epsilon > \mu$, $\avg{s(\epsilon)} = 0$. ($\theta(\mu-\epsilon)$). Not
exact; there is some rounding off of the distribution due to thermal
fluctuations. One of the themes of this lecture (and of the last lecture)
is that all of the action occurs around the Fermi level.

We have to finish the lecture by asking ourselves what happens when we
increase the temperature. The main thing that happens is that density of
states goes down, yes, but there is no reason for potential to stay
put (thermocouple effect!). We have to push the chemical potential slightly
down.

This applies to three dimensions; for a two-dimensional electron gas, you
can show that chemical potential is constant, and for a one-dimensional
gas, you can show that it increases with temperature.

So what am I doing here? I am taking the same graph we just showed, but now
flipping the coordinates. At zero temperature, all the states are full. We
actually speak of the sea of electrons, which is totally filled at zero
temperature.

So what happens? It increases with temperature (to first-order, you can
ignore change of potential), and it starts to round off: the sea is not
totally filled -- electrons start to pop out of the lattice, and we have
what is called a "hole". A hole is not truly a particle (it's the absence
of one, really), and in solid state we speak of "quasi-particles".

The first thing we can ask ourselves is the charge of this
quasiparticle. It has a positive charge.

Suppose I have an electric field. In some sense, I am tilting the energy:
$\epsilon = \epsilon_0 - \abs{q} V$ (where V is the electric potential, q
is the elementary charge). So if I have a field going to the right, V going
down, and the electric field is constant and positive along the x, this
corresponds to tilting.

The hole will tend to migrate toward the right; the electron will tend to
migrate toward the left.

In some sense, holes act as anti-electrons (positrons). This is how Dirac
interpreted negative energy states in the solution of his equation for
half-integer spin particles.

We have a constant number of particles. $\avg{\frac{N}{V}} = \int_0^\infty
f(\epsilon) D(\epsilon) d\epsilon$ (forgetting about temperature dependence
for now). Also equal to $\int_0^{\epsilon_F} D(\epsilon) d\epsilon$ at zero
$\tau$.

$$= \int_0^{\epsilon_F} f(\epsilon,\tau) D(\epsilon) d\epsilon +
\int_{\epsilon_F}^\infty f(\epsilon, \tau) D(\epsilon) d\epsilon =
\int_0^{\epsilon_F} D(\epsilon) d\epsilon
\\ \implies \int_{\epsilon_F}^\infty f D(\epsilon) d\epsilon = \int_0
^{\epsilon_F}\bracks{1 - f(\epsilon, \tau)}D(\epsilon d\epsilon
$$

Recall: $f$ corresponds to electrons; $1-f$ corresponds to holes. Hole-like
excitation, electron-lilke excitation.

$u(\tau) - u(0) = \int_0^\infty \epsilon f D(\epsilon) d\epsilon -
\int_0^{\epsilon_F} \epsilon D(\epsilon) d\epsilon =
\int_{\epsilon_F}^\infty \epsilon f D(\epsilon) d\epsilon -
\int_0^{\epsilon_F} \epsilon (1-f) D(\epsilon d\epsilon$. Adding zero, we
can get $\int_{\epsilon_F}^\infty (\epsilon - \epsilon_F) f D(\epsilon)
d\epsilon - \int (\epsilon - \epsilon_F) (1-f)D(\epsilon) d\epsilon$.

We can use the symmetry we had before. We can write this explicitly by
substituting the values we had for $f$, $1-f$. Holes: increasing energy
going "down"; electorns: increasing energy going "up".

So let's do, rapidly, energy band structure. Up until now, I've just
considered a gas of electrons; have not said anything about containment. In
practice, electrons are in some kind of medium, and it is easiest to
discuss crystals because then it is in a periodic medium.

In a (cubic) crystal, the atoms are regularly spaced. If you try to solve
the Schrodinger equation for this kind of periodic lattice, what you will
arrive at is that the energy is a function of the momentum (or wave
number), but there are regions of momenta where the electrons can tunnel
resonantly from one region to the next. In other words, they are free to
move if the wavelength is right. If the wavelength is not right, they will
get stuck locally.

You may have some energy band diagram. Energy gap: region of energy where
the electrons cannot propagate. So: we have several things that happen,
depending on the element that we are considering. Sometimes, the element
also has some states above the gap (conduction band) are populated. That is
what happens for metals. In some sense, this is all what we have described
so far (our Fermi sea) -- we did not have to worry about the states below
the valence band.

Mass related to the curvature is considerably smaller in crystals than the
electrons.

So the other possibility is that basically your Fermi level wants to be
inside the energy gap. In that case, you have no small temperature; no
electrons available; they're all stuck in the valence band, so you have an
insulator.

We will see later on that if you have impurity levels, you could have
bending of the bands.

Let me briefly introduce the next subject, which I was hoping to finish by
the end of the lecture, which is the heat capacity of a metal. What the
heat capacity will be just $\pderiv{U}{T} = V\pderiv{}{t} \int_0^\infty
\epsilon f(\epsilon,\tau) D(\epsilon) d\epsilon$. The other thing that
depends on the temperature is f.

$\deriv{f}{\tau} = -\frac{(\epsilon - \mu)}{\tau^2}
\frac{1}{\parens{\exp(\frac{\epsilon - \mu}{\tau}) + 1}^2}$

Midterm material will stop here.
