Physics 112: Statistical Mechanics
==================================
Fermi-Dirac/Bose-Einstein: April 9, 2012
========================================
Several things to discuss: midterm on Friday. Basically, the first seven
chapters of the notes, stopping at slide 10 of the notes without
questions. Try to have something less long, less difficult than midterm
#2. Mostly interested in concepts. Difficulties many of you have is that
you get confused between the various concepts. You really should be asking
yourself what method to apply. Understand how all the concepts are related
to each other. Clear emphasis on black body & Fermi-Dirac, but I will try
to judge how you put that in context with the rest. So one question that
comes from before. Things like definition of entropy that you need to know.

The two things I wanted to do today: metals -- $C \propto T$;
semiconductors. On Wednesday, we will finish the Fermi-Dirac and get into
Bose-Einstein.

Reminder: in crystals, the relationship between energy and momentum (what
we call in Physics the dispersion relations): gap between conduction and
valence bands -- energies are not allowed. Sometimes, the conduction band
is naturally filled. There are enough electrons in the crystal such that
you have a Fermi level above the energy of the conduction band.

In that case, we have basically the same formalism as we have had so far,
except that the energy is something like $\epsilon = \epsilon_c
\frac{\parens{p - p_0}^2}{2m_e^*}$. This mass is not the mass of the
electron; it is the mass of the electron inside the crystal (which is
usually smaller). All we have done can be generalized to that case. The
only thing which really changes is the mass of the electron. (also, usually
$p_0$ goes away)

Now, let's look at the heat capacity of the electrons in the crystal. In
order to have the heat capacity, I must compute the energy of the
eleectrons. That is very straightforward: $V\int_0^\infty \epsilon
\frac{1}{e^{\frac{\epsilon-\mu}{\tau}} + 1}D(\epsilon) d\epsilon$. Since $C
= \pderiv{U}{T}\Big|_V = h\deriv{U}{\tau} = k_BV\int_0^\infty \epsilon
\deriv{}{\tau}\parens{\frac{1}{e^{()} + 1}}D(\epsilon)
d\epsilon$. Derivative of $s(\epsilon)$ w.r.t $\tau$, not $\epsilon$. So
the action is occurring only around the chemical potential. So that is what
we will use. It's the narrow region around $\mu$. We have seen $\mu$ does
not vary rapidly with temperature, so let's take $\mu \approx
\epsilon_F$. (we have already used this, since we did not use chain rule
for $\deriv{\mu}{\tau}$. Number of particles is $\int s(\epsilon)
D(\epsilon) d\epsilon$. But number of particles is not changing, so
$\pderiv{N}{\tau} = 0$. 

Thus $C = k_B V\int_0^\infty \frac{\parens{\epsilon - \epsilon_F}^2}{\tau^2}
\frac{e^{\parens{\frac{\epsilon - \epsilon_f}{\tau}}} D(\epsilon)
d(\epsilon - \epsilon_F)}{\parens{e^{\frac{\epsilon - \epsilon_f}{\tau}} +
1}^2}$. Also, using the limits from $-\infty$ to $\infty$ is making the
approximation that $\epsilon \gg \tau$. This is a quantity that you
compute. $C \sim k_B D(\epsilon_F) A V \tau$.

This linear dependence on temperature is because the number of electrons
involved is proportional to temperature.

Taking into account phonons, $C_{tot} = C_e + C_\phi = \gamma T + AT^3$;
$C_e \ll \frac{3}{2}N k_B$. This by the way solved a great quandary that
people had at the beginning of the 19th century. There were electrons in
metals at the time, and we could actually compute their density. Heat
capacity estimate using ideal gas law was way off: only electrons that
affected anything were those close to the Fermi energy.

Semiconductors
==============

Semiconductors are substances where the Fermi level is somewhere in the
gap. At zero temperature, they will be totally insulators. The difference
between insulators and semiconductors is the magnitude of the gap. If the
gap is very big, you can only excite electrons from the valence band to the
conduction band at very high temperatures. For semiconductors, the gap is
somewhat smaller, and you can excite them at lower temperatures. We still
have our usual Fermi-Dirac distribution, but now the density of states is
somewhat different: you make parabolic approximations, and the density of
states of electrons is $D_e(\epsilon) d\epsilon \frac{2}{4\pi^2}
\parens{\frac{2m^*_e}{\hbar^2}}^{3/2} \sqrt{\epsilon - \epsilon_c}
d\epsilon$. (2 is from the spin)

The density of states for holes is inverted, since it is in the opposite
direction, and the masses are fairly different.

Basically, we can compute the total number of electrons: $n_{Te} = \int
f(\epsilon) D(\epsilon) d\epsilon = \int_0^{\epsilon_v} f(\epsilon)
D_h(\epsilon) d\epsilon + \int_{\epsilon_c}^\infty f(\epsilon)
D_e(\epsilon) d\epsilon$. Let us use the fact that $1 - \frac{1}{e^{\frac
{\epsilon - \mu}{\tau}} + 1} = \frac{1}{e^{\frac{\mu-\epsilon}{\tau}}+1}$
and rewrite this. What we get is that $\int_0^{\epsilon_v} \frac{1}{e^{
\frac{\mu - \epsilon}{\tau}} + 1}D_h(\epsilon) d\epsilon = \int_0
^{\epsilon_v} \frac{1} {e^{\frac{\epsilon - \mu}{\tau}} + 1}D_e(\epsilon)
d\epsilon$. Namely, number of holes is the same as the number of (free)
electrons.

Note that from this, ,we can see that the number of holes in the valence
band decreases with increasing $\mu$. Furthermore, we can determine $\mu$
by imposing charge neutrality.

The interest of semiconductors is that impurities are localized states in
the gap (not the band!). We still need to enforce charge
neutrality. Acceptors shift fermi level down to valence band, and I will
have holes in the valence band, and mostly positive carriers: p-type
material.
