Physics 112: Statistical Mechanics
==================================
Fermi-Dirac/Bose-Einstein: April 11, 2012
=========================================
Several housekeeping items, and midterm on Friday. What I would like to do
today is finish Fermi-Dirac and speak in particular about the Chandrasekhar
limit and Bose-Einstein condensation.

So: after Monday, we will have only two weeks of class remaining. The
question is what do we want to speak about after Fermi-Dirac and
Bose-Einstein. Would like to speak about phase transitions and nonideal
gas, but this will take one or two lectures. So we have one week of free
subject we can choose. Propositions: transport phenomenon (diffusion,
drift), semiconductors, or cosmology.

Correction: heat capacity in metals. When thinking of heat capacity, we had
to take the derivative with respect to temperature of $\int_0^\infty
\epsilon \mathcal{f}(s,\tau)\mathcal{D}(\epsilon)d\epsilon$. This is just
the energy of a Fermi-Dirac gas, and, taking the derivative with respect to
temperature, we can do a change of variables to $\epsilon^\prime \equiv
\epsilon - \epsilon_F$ without changing our result (the jacobian is 1).

So let me provide other examples of degenerate Fermi gas. $^3$He has spin
$\frac{1}{2}$. cf problem set. very different behavior from $^4$He: phase
separation. Behaves as a magnetic fluid. Nobel prize of Richardson and
Oscheroff (?). At low temperature, these two fluids will not mix, and that
is what we actually use for supercooling.

Nuclear matter: protons and neutrons in the nucleus are also fermions, and
a fairly good model (bag model) is that these have relatively small
interactions with respect to each other. Have surface tension; tend to
stick together because of the bag. Not very modern way of thinking: muons
and whatnot. But to a first order, a fairly good approximation.

Typical radius of nucleus: $R \approx 1.3 \cdot 10^{-13} A^{\frac{1}{3}}$
cm. Velocity very high: $T_F \approx 3 \cdot 10^{11}$ K. Fermi
momentum. Used here at LBL to produce first pions. Machines were not very
powerful at that time: one of first cyclotrons (380 MeV), and they sent an
$\alpha$ onto a $^{12}C$, which produced this pion.

One of the most interesting applications of Fermi-Dirac statistics is in
white dwarves and neutron stars. What I told you so far is because we have
to stack the particles' energy (because I cannot put more than one particle
in each state), they are fairly large energies on the order of the Fermi
energy. This results in pressure. So the equilibrium of a star is the
equilibrium between (gravitational) potential energy and pressure from the
kinetic energy.

There is one class of stars (white dwarves), which is what our sun will
become. At some point in their lives, some stars will discard their
envelopes and contract into what is known as a white dwarf. High pressure;
very dense. What is providing the pressure is the degenerate gas of
electrons. There are of course protons and neutrons around, but they are
just not active in defining the pressure.

One way to express this equilibrium between gravitational pull (the star
tends to collapse, and the pressure which tends to keep it from collapsing)
is to look at the kinetic energy and the potential energy. Let's compare
the potential energy: let us assume our star is round. Take a constant
density $\rho$ (not true: physically, it goes as $\frac{M}{\frac{4}{3}\pi
R^3}$ -- this means that $n \propto \frac{M}{R^3}$).

This potential means we have to be related to the force and go as
$\frac{GM^2}{R}$. There will be some geometric factor in front, which you
will compute in your problem set. There is a negative sign, of course, and
let us call this $U_{\mathrm{pot}}-b\frac{M^2}{R}$. So what is the kinetic
energy? It goes as $\propto M\epsilon_F$. Let us distinguish between two
cases: first, if you are nonrelativistic, $\epsilon_F \propto n^{\frac{2}
{3}}$, so the kinetic energy goes as $\frac{M^{\frac{5}{3}}}{R^2}$. And if
I am ultrarelativistic (which can happen if mass of object is fairly
large), $\epsilon_F \propto n^{\frac{1}{3}}$, and so $U_k \propto \frac{
M^{\frac{4}{3}}}{R}$.

So in the nonrelativistic case, if I take the sum of the two energies, the
star has a minimum energy at a specific $R$. So the star is stable. This is
to be contrasted in the ultrarelativistic case: we then have still the
potential energy $U_p = -b\frac{M^2}{R}$, and kinetic energy which goes as
$U_k = c\frac{M^{\frac{4}{3}}}{R}$. For small M, the star expands; goes to
nonrelativistic cases and beocmes stable; at some sufficiently large M, the
sum is negative, and the star collapses. First described by Chandrasekhar
during his PhD. Degeneracy pressure cannot balance gravity if M too big:
roughly $1.4 M_\odot$: stars beyond this limit will go supernova.

Same story with neutrons, except now $\epsilon_F \approx 300 MeV$. Also has
a Chandrasekhar limit $3 M_\odot$, beyond which the star collapses on
itself and also gives rise to a supernova. Accretion from neighboring
stars.

Large stars collapse into neutron stars, and if the neutron star is too
large, it will further become a black hole.

Type Ia supernovae can be normalized: the story going to smoke is a little
more complex. Standard amount of material that just goes. What you see is
that universe expansion is accelerating instead of decelerating. Gravity
becomes repulsive (result of dark energy). Recent Nobel Prize (Saul
Perlmutter).

Bose-Einstein Condensation
==========================
The plus one is what gives you the square distribution in the Fermi-Dirac.

Note that the Pauli-exclusion principle only applies to Fermi-Dirac
particles. I can put as many particles in the ground state as I want. Talk
about choosing $\mu$ (since it is, after all, one of our random variables)
such that $\mu \approx \epsilon_0 - \frac{\tau}{N}$: set $\frac{N(\epsilon_0
- \mu)}{\tau} = 1$. Issue with using the method we've been using up to this
point (i.e. for Fermi-Dirac gas), the continuous approximation is not
accurate enough, since the gaps are actually important. You must rely on
the discrete sum. You do indeed solve this equation. What you get is that
indeed $f = \avg{s(0)} = \frac{1}{\exp(-\frac{\mu}{\tau})} = -\frac{\mu}
{\tau}$, so we get an incredibly small $\mu$: $10^{-26}$ eV. And if you
look at the second state, there are very few particles in the second state.

Temperature dependence: calculate separately condensed phase and normal
phase. Can use continuous approximation for excited state, but must isolate
ground state. We show that we have a certain Einstein condensation
temperature; $\tau_E = \frac{2\pi\hbar^2}{m}\expfrac{N}{2.612 V}{2/3}
\implies N_{exc} = N\expfrac{\tau}{\tau_E}{3/2}$. For large densities,
$\tau_E$ is not very small. 
