Physics 112: Statistical Mechanics
==================================
Bose-Einstein Condensation: April 16, 2012
==========================================
Today: In particular, speak about number of states, superfluidity in, for
instance, liquid helium, and discoveries of Bose-Einstein condensates.

Midterms will be graded by tomorrow, presumably. You will have them on
Wednesday. So the final is on May 7, so three weeks from today, early in
the morning (sorry about that, but you are accustomed now). Of course, it
will cover everything that you have covered. After Bose-Einstein
condensates, I will have a short chapter on phase partitions (that is an
important subject in statistical mechanics), and then we will spend some
time on cosmology next week to show you how you can apply this to a
practical problem (it is not that practical).

Office hours Wednesday from 3-4; today is as usual (11-12).

Bose-Einstein Condensates
=========================

Bose-Einstein had an occupation number of $\frac{1}{\exp\parens{
\frac{\epsilon - \mu}{\tau}} - 1}$. This negative one is critical and will
determine the behavior of the condensation. What we saw was that when
$\frac{\mu - \epsilon_0}{\tau} \sim -\frac{1}{N}$ (for some $\epsilon_0$
being our ground state), roughly all of the particles are in the ground
state.

In principle we should make the calculation of $\mu$ by just looking at the
total number of particles: by the usual sum. Recall that when measuring
$\mu$, we cannot use the integral approximation that we used in the
Fermi-Dirac case, since our states of low energy are not very close
together. The integral approximation does not take into account the spacing
between the states. When $\mu$ is very small, this is not a very good
approximation. One way of thinking about it: states get denser at higher
$\epsilon$, but what happens with the Bose-Einstein condensation? When
$\frac{\mu - \epsilon_0}{\tau} \sim \frac{1}{N} \ll \epsilon - \epsilon_0$,
this spacing is critical: it will enforce that most of the particles are in
the ground state, and very few are in excited states.

So can we make calculations of this $\mU$ analytically? No; this is a
numeric problem.

We can talk, however, of isolating the first term and then using the
integral approximation on all excited states. That is an approximation, and
we would like this to be equal to N. We are interested in the second term,
the number of excited states. We would like $\frac{\epsilon_0 - \mu}{\tau}
\sim \frac{1}{N}$, so we can replace the excited states with $N_{exc}
\equiv V \int_{ \epsilon_1}^\infty \frac{1}{\exp \parens{\frac{\epsilon_0 -
\mu}{\tau}} \exp \parens{\frac{\epsilon - \epsilon_0}{\tau}} - 1}
D(\epsilon) d\epsilon$.

Working through the math, and setting $\epsilon_0$ to 0, we get $N_{exc} =
2.612 n_Q V$. It does not depend on N if $\frac{\mu}{\tau} = 0$. We thus
define the Einstein condensation temperature as $\tau_E \equiv \frac{2\pi
\hbar^2}{m} \expfrac{N}{2.612 V}{2/3}$, so $N_{exc} = N\expfrac{\tau}
{\tau_E} {3/2}$.

Liquid $^4$He
-------------
If you look in the slides, I have actually computed (also probably in
Kittel) the numerical values for $^4$He. If you apply this naively, you
will get 3.1K. So $^4$He is expected (if there were no interactions between
the atoms) to behave like a Bose-Einstein condensate. Not exactly true:
behaves as a Bose-Einstein condensate about 2.17K. This is important:
called the Landau point (also called lambda point because this looks like a
lambda). Helium is liquid about 4K. Literally changes sign at 2.17K.

All of your particles are in the same state and becomes a macroscopic
quantum state. Very fun to see (oh god!). Basically in the same way as in
electromagnetism, which is doing a square root of number of photons and
plane waves: we have a wave function which is the square root of energies.

With this quantum effect: you can use vortices which are quantized: have a
certain amount of angular momentum. You have the equivalent of the two-slit
experiment, where basically you have liquid helium go through two slots,
and they diffract exactly like Young's double-slit experiment. You have
basically all the interference phenomena.

The most dramatic macroscopic property is superfluidity. Not only dramatic,
it is a pain for experimentalists working at low temperature. Basically
what is happening is that the atoms are not subject to any kinds of forces
from the wall. They begin to flow on the wall as if it had no roughness
(explanation forthcoming!). It makes the helium have no surface tension on
the surface and go through cracks. One of the problems of experimentalists
working at low temperature is something that is essentially leak-proof
above the Landau point (2.17K), but once you cross that threshold, bang!
the thing begins to leak like a sieve.

And of course 2.17K is something that you go and look; you'd have to warm
up and try to understand where the leak could have come from, redo the
solder, get back down, and maybe nine times out of ten, this thing is
leaking again. That's why low-temperature is sometimes called
slow-temperature physics. It takes a lot of tries to fix a system which is
leaking.

To give you an idea of what is going on, I would like you the following
question: when is energy transfer maximized? When the two masses are equal;
easy to show via conservation of energy and conservation of
momentum. Important consequence: if $M \ll m$, then $\frac{1}{2}mv^2 \to
0$. In one dimension (you can of course generalize to several dimensions),
with a particle of mass M, $E = \frac{p^2}{2M}$. I have to conserve energy
and momentum, so the dispersion relationship of my particle of mass $m$ can
be expressed graphically by the intersection of two parabolas. If $m = M$,
the curves have the same width, so energy transfer is maximized. If m is
infinite, this is flat: I am not losing any energy.

We have a large effective $m$, but the analogy breaks down: system that is
very soft: no way to transfer a lot of momentum. When we send a little ball
into a superfluid liquid helium, it does not lose energy: keeps going as if
it were in a vacuum.

If your velocity is large enough, you can lose energy to phonons. In liquid
helium, there are also quantized oscillations. You have a system with
excitations, and there are phonons. If I am below the tangent, there is no
way I can have phonons (i.e. if travelling below velocity of sound). Only
if I am above the speed of sound can I lose energy. It will only lose
energy to phonons, and not to kicking of the system. Can emit excitations
(phonons) if velocity large enough. This may remind you of Cherenkov
radiation. This ia a phenomenon remarkably similar to that. If a particle
goes through a medium faster to the local velocity of light (smaller than c
because of diffraction index), then you will emit light. Same thing: if you
go above the velocity of sound, you will emit phonons.

So a lot of interesting physics; you can do the calculations, but the graph
is good enough to show what is happening.

By the way, there is one small experiment, which is somewhat interesting:
if you put a little pipe going through the surface of liquid helium in a
container with glass walls, and you begin to pump at 4K, and the
temperature of the helium goes down. Suddenly at 2.17K, you have a fountain
of liquid helium coming out of your tube. Very cool. Another thing that
happens is that the helium rises up on the sides and heats up to 2.17K
where it evaporates. It goes through cracks.

In the late 90s, there were interesting successful attempts by two groups
to artificially create Bose-Einstein condensation: one at NIST/JILA in
Boulder, and one at MIT.

This is an example where they were trapping atoms in the form of a ring,
which you can observe rotating. This is just the spectacular demonstration
that the particles are totally coherent.

Any way: how do we do that? What you need to make a Bose-Einstein
condensate: low temperature (need to cool atoms) and high density (of the
order of the quantum density). So how do you cool atoms? Having them bounce
on the wall is not a very efficient way of cooling them.

The breakthrough came from what was called laser cooling: suppose I have an
atom that I want to cool. This atom is going in many directions. Let's
choose an absorption line of this atom which has some resonance and
frequency. Instead of sending a laser at the resonance frequency, let's
send a laser slightly below this frequency. What is happening? This is if I
were in the rest frame of the atom. If the atom is moving towards the
laser, in this rest frame, it sees the frequency of the laser slightly
blue-shifted, so it absorbs the laser more, and it will emit the photons
over $4\pi$ after a while, and it has lost kinetic energy. If it goes away
from the laser, it will scatter less (it will see the frequency
red-shifted). The net result is if I am sending laser light from all
directions, I will tend to cool my atoms and decrease their energy.

We can use the same idea to trap the atoms: put magnetic field on the side:
frequency is changing; oblige particles to be in the area of zero magnetic
field.

In practice this is a little more complex than this: you cannot make a
magnetic field that looks like an infinite square well, but you can have a
rotating magnetic field, so every time the particles want to go out, they
will see the magnetic field (whose energy will be higher: particles are
slow since they have been cooled). Two groups in our department are doing
that as their main research.
