Physics 112: Statistical Mechanics
==================================
Fermi-Dirac, Bose-Einstein, Phase transitions: April 18, 2012
=============================================================
Reasoning why chemical potential does not vary much at low temperatures: it
looks fairly rectangular under normal circumstances. When we have a finite
temperature, we have some rounding of the distribution.

The occupation number of holes: if I am a distance $\delta$ from $\mu$,
this is the occupation number $\lambda$ of electrons. The two are equal
because of this addition. On the other hand, that's not what we want to
have: we want to multiply by density of states. We have to plot
$f(\epsilon, \tau)$ and integrate over that. In two dimensions,
$D(\epsilon)$ is constant. So this is the same graph, except now we have
$D(\epsilon)$ on our axis. At a distance $\delta$ from the chemical
potential, now the _number_ of holes is equal to the _number_ of electrons
(as opposed to occupation number: we've taken into account density of
states, so this is for the entire system).

Because of this symmetry, the sum from 0 to infinity of $f(\epsilon, \tau)
D(\epsilon) d\epsilon$ is exactly equal to $\int_0^\mu D(\epsilon
d\epsilon$. This is known to be $\int_0^{\epsilon_F} D(\epsilon)
d\epsilon$. Slightly different from what happens in 3 dimensions:
$D(\epsilon) \propto \sqrt{\epsilon}$, so my function $fD$ looks different
because I am losing less on the hole-side than gaining on the electron, so
I have to reduce the chemical potential a little bit at $\tau$ at 0.

Don't confuse occupation number (which is symmetric) with the number (which
is not symmetric in general). Symmetric only in two-dimensional case
because $D(\epsilon)$ constant.

Let me, then, finish rapidly what I wanted to say on Fermi-Dirac and
Bose-Einstein. We were speaking about this very nice experiment: BEC atoms,
cooling in a trap. Now becoming routine, but before were very difficult to
do with atoms. And now people are doing that with molecules; they are
making artificial crystals; there is a whole industry. They take atoms and
arrange them in a particular fashion and potential. Now that the technology
of cooling the atoms and trapping them is well understood, there is a lot
of physics happening.

Graph corresponds to spatial density of atoms. Claim: not a great
discovery; just a technical feat. Superconductivity: in low-temperature
superconductors, you have electrons pairing in Cooper pairs for phonon
interactions.

Condensation theory is a bad approximation: interactions between Cooper
pairs are important. The temperature at which superconductivity appears is
much smaller than you would naively compute. Similar effects: zero
resistance (as in superfluidity), vortices: quantization of flux, phase
shift effects: all the $n^2$ behavior. Superconductor with two junctions is
equivalent to Young's double-slit experiment. Very similar properties; very
important devices.

$^3He$ is spin $\frac{1}{2}$, and you have pairing of the spin to create a
spin of 1 to create superconductivity. Then, because this is in vacuum, you
have very strange effects: magnetic properties.

This is a very important effect in condensed-matter physics. Emerging
phenomenon: completely different phenomenon at low temperature. Surprising:
not that low of temperature for sufficiently dense systems.

Energy density for both bosons and fermions goes as $T^4$. Useful when
considering early universe when considering expansion.

Pressure: we have never solved problem of scattering of particles (shown
force per unit area). Once again, define independent variables when taking
partial derivatives. What is constant is energy and number of particles (if
we want to use $p = \tau \pderiv{\sigma}{N}$.

The force per unit area on the wall can be readily computed in the
following way: I am considering a small area on the wall $dA$. Now, if I
have a particle coming in (I will assume, by the way, because of the
symmetry, the angle of reflection is the same as that of incidence), the
force is merely $\pderiv{p}{t}$, i.e. what is the change of momentum per
unit time? And the pressure will be the force divided by $dA$. I will have
to compute this: $\frac{1}{dA\Delta p}\int 2p\cos\theta v\Delta t dA
\cos\theta n(p) p^2 dp d\Omega = 2\pi \int cos^2\theta d\cos\theta \int 2pv
n(p)p^2dp$. The $\theta$ integral gives me $\frac{1}{3}$, and what we have
is that my pressure is $\frac{4\pi}{3} \int pv n(p) p^2 dp$. Depending on
whether you are nonrelativistic or (ultra)relativistic, pv is just $mv^2 =
2\epsilon$, so $P = \frac{2}{3}U$. If you are relativistic, $pv$ is just
$pc = \epsilon$, the pressure is therefore just $\frac{1}{3}U$. And check
with our various results: this is the same pressure as the thermodynamic
definition $\tau\pderiv{\sigma}{V}\Big|_{U,N}$

Explanation for why we have pressure for Fermi-Dirac even at zero
temperature: I have to stack up my states in energy space, and I have to
have states that are high velocity even at zero temperature. That's one of
the interpretations of the pressure of a Fermi-Dirac gas.

phase transitions: system in contact with reservoir, but not necessarily in
equilibrium. What is minimized? Landau free energy. We have seen this: free
energy is not defined because $\tau$ is not defined. Energy is not minimzed
because system is constantly kicked by thermal fluctuations.
