Physics 112: Statistical Mechanics
==================================
Phase transitions: April 23, 2012
=================================

Would like to finish phase transitions if possible. The modern way of
looking at phase distributions involves looking at the Landau
distributions: consider the Landau free energy $F_L = U_s - \tau_R
\sigma_s$ and Landau free enthalpy $G_L = U_s - \tau_R\sigma_s + p_R
V_s$. The first one is used when considering constant volume, and the
second one is used at constant pressure.

Generally speaking, you will look at the dependence of $U_s, \sigma_s, V_s$
on an order parameter $\xi$, and we are looking at equilibrium, which is
obtained at the minimum.

You may be somewhat confused by the fact that you cannot define the state
of a system by just one parameter. We must almost actually minimize with
respect to all other variables.

This minimization comes in usually by the expression of $\sigma_s
(\xi)$. When you speak of $\sigma_s(\xi)$, usually energy depends directly
on $xi$, whereas $\sigma$ depends on probabilities. You will maximize
$\sigma_s$ at some given $\xi$.

When I was speaking of ferromagnetism, at one point I was changing in the
expression of the entropy $\frac{mB}{\tau} \to \tanh^{-1}\parens{\frac{M}
{nm}}$, I was already doing this minimization.

The net result is that if I plot F as a function of the magnetization, at
high temperature, the magnetization wants to be zero (since that is the
minimum of the Landau free energy), and this curve will move upwards until
suddenly, at a critical temperature (the Curie temperature), it develops a
minimum, and the equilibrium magnetization becomes nonzero.

If I plot the magnetization as a function of teh temperature, it is zero
above this temperature. This is a second-order phase transition, and you
move smoothly from $m=0$ to $m \neq 0$. There is no discontinuity in
$m$. This is very different from the case in which we go from gas to
liquid. Continuous evolution: the thing that is discontinuous is the first
derivative.

Classical gases: what are we missing in our description (point-like
particles which just scatter when they make contact with each other).

Issues: limit to compressibility (not taking into account volume of
particles). Interaction forces (long-distance): attractive Van der Waals
forces (polarization due to fluctuations induces polarizations in other
local particles). So how do these forces look? I have a very strong
repulsive force when they are in contact and a weaker $\frac{1}{r}$ force
when they are sufficiently far apart.

$V \to V - Nb$ (where $b$ is the volume of the atom). So this is the
approximation. Instead of a very fast approaching force, we linearize about
this point. For the attractive force, I will treat in a similar manner to
what we did for magnetism: mean field approximation. $\avg{U} \to \avg{U} -
\avg{\phi}\frac{N(N-1)}{2}$. I will say that $U = T - \frac{N^2 a}{V}$
because the average of $\phi$ is $\frac{\int \phi d^3 r}{V} \equiv
\frac{2a}{V}$. I will make this approximation: there is an attractive force
that goes as $N^2$.

We want to compute $G_L$. I have $U_s = T - \frac{N^2 a}{V}$, and, back to
counting of states, $\sigma_s = N \bracks{\log \bracks{}\frac{\expfrac{M
U_K}{3\pi\hbar^2 N}}{\frac{N}{V - Nb}} \equiv N \log \frac{n_Q}{n} +
\frac{5}{2}N$ (the Sackur-Tetrode formula).

At $U_k = \frac{3}{2} N\tau$, I am not yet in equilibrium with the
reservoir, so there is no real way to define temperature.

What is the pressure? There is a critical pressure $\frac{a}{27b^2}$ (don't
ask me; just result of calculation) above which things behave normally:
$G_L$ normally, and as temperature goes down, $G_L$ as a function of $V_s$
moves downward. But below this limit, I start to develop two minima: moves
up and to the left as temperature goes down.

$\pderiv{G_L}{V_s$ gives us the Van der Waals equation of state,
$\parens{p_R + \frac{N^2a}{V_s^2}}\parens{V_s - Nb} = N\tau_R$. I have
already defined $p_c = \frac{a}{27b^2}$, and $\tau_c = \frac{8a}{27b}$.

At this critical temperature, it begins to develop a certain inflection
point, and the liquid/gas relationship emerges.

If you do this calculation numerically, it is not easy to plot: there is a
big difference between the volume of the gas and the volume of the gas for
different values of the pressure compared to the critical pressure.

At high pressure compared to teh critical pressure, you stay always in the
gas phase. As you increase the temperature, it will decrease, and the
minimum goes down: the volume just changes. Nothing special happens. If you
are below the critical temperature, at high temperature, volume is large,
and you see a minimum at high temperature, and there is a second minimum
which develops: the liquid. That is what is happening.

Transition from liquid to gas as we increase the temperature: it does not
go by itself: there is a potential barrier between the two phases: liquid
$\to$ gas needs a wall or a dust particle (creating a bubble takes work.

Even if the gas has a smaller free enthalpy, I still have to overcome this
potential barrier (we are stuck in the liquid if nothing else
happens). Takes work to create a bubble.

Meta-stable states: superheated liquid or supercooled vapor: need surfaces
for transition to occur.

Unless you increase the temperature high enough such that there are no more
local minima, you will go extremely brutally.
