Physics 112: Statistical Mechanics
==================================
Phase transitions, Cosmology: April 25, 2012
============================================

What I wanted to do was speak about the final. You have the right to have
four pages now (single-sided) of notes. As usual, my advice is to rewrite
your notes because this class is more about concepts and how they relate to
each other than formulae. As should be quite obvious from the midterms, if
you take the wrong formula and apply to a situation, the result is
unpredictable.

I think we all agree that 8am is not advisable. So what I can propose is a
review session either on Wednesday 4-6, Friday 10-12, or Friday 2-4 (Alex's
is on Thursday 1-3pm in 9 Lewis). I will focus the review on chemical
potential, since we have not really seen this before.

Strong preference for Wednesday.

So let's look at phase transitions. We were looking at this question of how
the system goes from liquid to gas as we increase the temperature. The
thing I wanted to attract your attention that for this kind of first-order
phase transition, the behavior is not continuous: there is a discontinuity
because there are to minima in $G_L$. Because there is a potential barrier
between the two minima, the system can be stuck in one of the states. It is
not true that if you heat (pure) water at about 100 degrees Celsius, it
will not boil. It will be stuck in a metastable state of superheated
liquid. Will only boil because of defects.

Import in stuff like bubble chambers and particle detectors (important for
detection of dark matter). Can stay metastable for minutes. This is fairly
characteristic of what we call first-order transitions.

Chemical potential as a function of $p, \tau, N$ has no dependence on
$N$. We showed that $G = N\mu(p,\tau)$.

Entropy of liquid is lower than that of gas with same parameters. Related
to the fact that there are fewer degrees of freedom, so smaller number of
states. Using that the Gibbs free energies are the same, $\Delta H = LN >
0$, where $L$ is the latent heat per particle.

Coexistence: you can follow the separation between the liquid and gas as a
function of pressure and temperature. When the Landau free enthalpy is
equal between the systems, you are on this locus where gas and liquid
coexist, and of course it stops when you reach critical pressure and
critical temperature, which we call the critical point. This is of course
of intense interest to us.

There is a very famous formula derived in the mid-nineteenth century by
Clausius and Clapeyron, which is very simple. Clearly we have
$G_L(p(\tau),\tau) = G_g(p(\tau),\tau)$ (equation at the coexistence
line). Now, taking the derivative with respect to $\tau$, we get
$\pderiv{G_L}{\tau}\deriv{p}{\tau} + \pderiv{G_L}{\tau} = \pderiv{G_g}
{\tau}\deriv{p}{\tau} + \pderiv{G_g}{\tau}$. So what are these terms?

$dG = -\sigma d\tau + Vdp + \mu dN$, so $\pderiv{G}{p} = V$,
$\pderiv{G}{\tau} = -\sigma$. Thus we can solve: $\deriv{p}{\tau} =
\frac{\sigma_l - \sigma_g}{V_g - V_l} = \frac{1}{\tau}\frac{L}{v_g - v_l}$,
where $v_g \equiv \frac{V_g}{N}$. If you use that $v_l \ll v_g \sim
\frac{\tau}{p}$, then this is roughly $-\frac{pL}{\tau^2}$, or $p \sim
\exp\parens{-\frac{L}{\tau}}$. If you express the partial pressure, you
have a straight line, which is actually the latent heat per particle. Very
good approximation for water (given the number of assumptions we have made)
and ice (since we can do the same thing between solid and liquid). Also an
excellent approximation for $^4\mathrm{He}$.

That's basically all regarding phase transitions. These arise from
correlations between particles: no phase transitions with ideal gases. The
method used here is the mean field approximation as a first-order. Two
types: first order (coexistence, latent heat, metastability) and second
order (continuous transformation -- discontinuity in derivative). In first
order, there is a critical point. Very important in modern statistical
mechanics.

Cosmology
=========
Let me dissipate ambiguities regarding presence on final. The details of
what I will tell you will not be on the final. But the kind of principles
that I am applying (the thermal physics and statistical mechanics) are
clearly on the final: these are the things we have spoken about in
considerable detail over the last 14 weeks.

What I would like to speak to you about is basically the thermal evolution
of the universe. We have something (we call this the Big Bang). Big
explosion: a lot of unknown particle physics at the beginning. At about a
tenth of a nanosecond in, what we see is fairly well defined. A few
thousand years gives us the microwave background.

How do we know that the universe is expanding? We can measure the Hubble
recession of distant galaxies. To a first approximation, their velocity is
proportional to their distance. There is essentially 80 years of research
where we have learned to measure distances, account for local velocities,
and more.

THe second thing (which we have spoken about) is that we have observed this
background radiation (about 3K). The final thing (which I will speak about
in more detail on Friday) is that if we, in the early universe, not only
observe protons and electrons, but that pi-modal -- helium and deuterium
have been formed -- in order to understand how these things happened, we
need a very hot phase.

Best way to think about this expanding universe (which is mind-boggling
because everything is changing) is to divide out the expansion. We have
something called the scale parameter a(t) and go from the physical
coordinate to the comoving coordinate, where we take this expansion away.

Now, there is something that we call the Friedman equation: the sum of
kinetic energy and potential energy is constant. We can compute constants
in general relativity. If the curvature of the universe is infinite, this
is constant.

For all practical purposes, we believe this all started from a phase
transition: inflation. This second-order phase transition led to
exponential expansion. What is going on? We assume that we have a field
which we have never seen (order parameter -- inflaton). Same that we've
used, except now in quantum mechanics: instead of classic variables, we now
have quantum fields. As temperature decreases, this begins to develop a
second minimum. This will induce a phase transition. System feels that its
energy is not equal to zero, which leads to an exponential increase of the
scale parameter. We call that inflation. We believe that in the space of
less than a tenth of a nanosecond, the universe has expanded by a factor of
60E40. For all practical purposes, this is what we call the big bang.
