Physics 112: Statistical Mechanics
==================================
Cosmology: April 25, 2012
=========================

Thermal history of the universe.  How thermodynamics / statistical physics
is applied to the field. Before I do that: let me remind you that next week
we will have review sessions Wed 4-6 in 325 Leconte and Th 1-3 9 Lewis.

What I am going to do is finish talking about inflation, then speak of the
evolution of temperature as a function of time, and finally give you an
idea about nucleosynthesis: how the elements (which have nuclei) were
formed. This will give us the opportunity to speak about three important
aspects of the course: phase transitions, more general arguments about
evolution of entropy, and the mass-action law.

For instance: looking at a proton and an electron, we get hydrogen. Or a
neutron and a proton: deuterium. Or deuterium and a proton: Helium-3.

The universe is expanding in a homogenous and isotropic manner. The
physical coordinates are related to comoving coordinates by a certain
expansion factor. This is interesting: relates speed of expansion to energy
density.

Did speak on Wednesday regarding what happens in the early universe: phase
transition (postulate). We believe that we had a phase transition, where
what was happening as a function of order parameter, the Landau free energy
developed a minimum, and suddenly the universe wants to go to this
point. When it does that, it discovers that is has a nonzero energy
density, and it begins to expand.

On the order of 60E40.

So: why do we need something like that? Need to justify cosmic microwave
background. Remember this is the radiation from the plasma in the early
universe at a given temperature. Recombined into hydrogen, so universe
became transparent.

Things were close (in causal contact). Then things were put very far
apart. In GR, there is no problem with having the space expand faster than
the speed of light.

That was the main reason for inflation: some reason for extremely fast
expansion of universe, which then settles down.

Space flat, so no worry regarding initial conditions. Quantum fluctuations
are frozen in and expand with space. Will provide seed for large scale
structure.

If you plot the power spectrum of density fluctuations as a function of
spatial frequency $k$ (just a Fourier transform). We have a power spectrum
that looks roughly parabolic (with a maximum), and we understand the
shape. If we measure the microwave background on this plot and extrapolate
from the expansion factor, it links perfectly with what we measure in the
galaxies in terms of structure. That was the great excitement about the
cosmic microwave background when we first measured these fluctuations: they
were right were we needed them to be.

We have no real mechanism for this field. Cosmology points to physics at
much higher energy: $10^{16}$ GeV. Best accelerators are $10^4$ GeV. One of
reasons for switching to cosmology.

What can we test? Measure polarization of microwave background: see
gravitational field. This is very much related to discussions in media on
multiverses.

What is constant in this comoving sphere during the expansion? The entropy
-- no heat transfer. The energy cannot be constant: the sphere is working
against the rest of the universe. There is this pressure. The volume
increases, $-pdV$ acts, and so the energy inside decreases by $pdV$. The
entropy on the other hand should not decrease: universe is isotropic and
homogeneous.

No generation of entropy if there are no first order phase transitions
(which would mean irreversibility).

This tells us that entropy per unit comoving volume has to be constant. $T
\propto \frac{1}{a(t)}$. Remember: we did show that the energy density for
relativistic particles (which dominated the entropy during the early
universe) goes as $T^4$. There is a factor corresponding to the degrees of
freedom, which is 1 per polarization for bosons and $\frac{7}{8}$ per
polarization for fermions So $\frac{\sigma}{\gamma} \propto g^* T^3$. That
is related to relativstic number of the number of particles.

So what is the $\frac{\sigma}{V_{\text{com}}} \propto g^*$. In that case,
we have $S_{com} \propto a^3 g^* T^3$, which gives us that $T \sim
\frac{1}{a(t)$. Same result as in GR.

Reason why temperature goes as $\frac{1}{a(t)}$ is related to the Doppler
shift. As the universe expands, the wavelength of the relativistic
particles is stretching out in GR, and the wavelength increase, frequency
decreases, therefore the temperature decreases.

If there is no change of degrees of freedom, $T \propto \frac{1}{a(t)}$. In
the parabolic graph, used that we can compute (from first principles)
temperature of fusion of hydrogen to be ~3000K. Universe was 1000x smaller
than it is now.

If the number of degrees of freedom is changing, you have a kink in the
temperature evolution.

With high enough temperature compared to binding energy, the product,
for all practical purposes, does not exist.

Indeed, in this case, the chemical potentials add.

Problem: running out of time. Try to tell a little bit about how we discuss
the formation of atoms in the early universe. Neutrons, protons,
electrons. At the early part (before about 3 minutes in the age of the
universe), we had too high of energy, and the neutrons plus protons could
not form deuterium. When the temperature dropped, deuterium was able to
form, and we had that. Then we could form Helium-3, Helium-4, etc. We have
to be a little careful when we have two charged particles, we have a
positive potential from the EM forces between the particles.

Let me show just one thing: we can use this kind of argument to follow the
expansion of the density of various components. In the space of a few
moments, you are forming all of the light nuclei in the universe. Can try
to measure amount of deuterium and whatnot. You arrive at the fact that
ordinary matter is only a tiny part of what we observe in the universe.

By the way: cosmic microwave background gives exactly the same results with
totally different physics.

Conclusion: what I wanted to conclude was the link between nuclear physics
at small scale and the universe at large scale. Now attempting to explore
links between particle physics / quantum gravity and the universe.

Inflation: origin of small scale quantum structure.
