Physics 112: Statistical Mechanics
==================================
Entropy and Stuff. Feb 1, 2012
------------------------------

REMINDER: states ⇒ microstates; configurations ⇒ macrostates.

Overview:
 * Discrete states
 * Isolated system in equilibrium

Postulate; H theorem. One of the finest works in physics by
Boltzmann. Shows that entropy is increasing. The probability distributions
of the states tend to equalize. Whatever initial probabilities tend to
evolve toward equilibrium.

 * Counting states

Quantum Mechanics (again)
=========================

Particle in a box (or, if you like, an infinite square well). By the axioms
of quantum mechanics, these solutions are identical to the modes of a
vibrating string.

[ clicker question regarding distance between momentum states. Talk
  about Uncertainty principle. ]
ℏ/2L: distance between momentum states.

quantization comes from the combination of both the eigenvalue equation as
well as the specific boundary conditions.

Same thing happens with a hydrogen atom. We have an electron orbiting
around the photon, and Bohr said that if you turn the nucleus by 2π, your
function should come back on itself. And then if you solve the radial
Schrödinger equation, it is the solution where you have something finite at
the origin and 0 at infinity which gives the quantization of energy.

Basically resonance conditions, like a vibrating string, will give us
discrete energy levels.

SPIN
====

Particles can carry a spin – a unit of angular momentum. Actually, they can
carry an angular momentum. Carrying integers and half-integers of angular
momentum – former are known as fermions, and latter are known as
bosons. Very different.

If I have a spin of 1, it can point up, nowhere, or down. The photon, which
is massless, is spin 1 with 2 spin states. (exception: usu. spin s ⇒ 2s+1
states.)

ε = mB, where m = magnetic moment, B = magnetic field. emission of photons,
directions of spin.

Important implication in medicine: MRI is the magnetic resonance
imaging. Uses this property to see where the spins of the hydrogen
are. Just looking at hydrogen, basically.

Energy now is is proportional to r².

Fundamental postulate
=====================

Probabilistic description of state of a system.

Systems in equilibrium. An isolated system in equilibrium is equally likely
to be in any of its accessible states. Kittel does not specify in
"equilibrium". It does not matter if we are close to equilibrium.

Consequences
------------

Probability of a configuration:
 * Probability of configuration: simple counting problem, normalized.

This allows us to compute probabilities of configurations. This method is
conventionally called a microcanonical computation. Characterized by being
very awkward, cumbersome, difficult to implement, and so on.

Entropy
=======

σ = -∑p log p= -H. H = Negentropy = Information (Shannon).

For an isolated system in equilibrium: identical to Kittel. In classical
thermodynamics, definition usually used is dQ = TdS.

Basically, we have a nondeterministic finite-state machine (weighted
probabilities and all) being run many times simultaneously. H theorem tells
us it will reach equilibrium i.e. all currents will cancel.

Γ{rs} = Γ{sr} ⇒ H theorem. Symmetry of the transition rate will cause the
evolution of the probabilities to converge eventually to a flat
distribution (_of microstates_). Else you have a nonzero divergence in more
than one state.

Sterling approximation: number of states goes to a gaussian.
