Physics 112: Statistical Mechanics
==================================
Entropy and Stuff. Feb 3, 2012
------------------------------

homework problem #2:
$\exp(u² - 2ρuv + v²) ⇒ exp(u² + (v-ρu)² - ρ²u²)$

Counting States: Discrete States
================================

With just counting states and some assumptions as to what pressure and
temperature are, we have PV = NkT and U = 3NkT/2.

Density of spatial states per unit phase space
----------------------------------------------

Phase space: Position space (x) $\otimes$ (p) Momentum space.

Density of quantum states (orbital states) is $\frac{1}{h^n}$ per particle
(n ≡ dimensions). That is, if I have a volume in the phase space, I can
count the number of orbital states for one particle by dividing this volume
by $h^3$ (in three dimensions).

The volume of the phase space is just the integral of $\frac{d^3 x d^3 p}{h³}$.

Ideal Gas
---------

Now consider N particles in weak interactions. Total energy U is
constant. $g = \Pi \int \frac{d^3 xd^3 p}{h^{3N}}$. Insert a $\delta(\sum
\frac{p_{i}^2}{2M} - U)$. Basically imposing that the total energy of my
system is U. The product of $dx_i$ will give $V^N$. So there is no problem
there. But what about the $d^3 p_i \delta(\sum...)$? Imposing some of the
$\frac{p_i^2}{2N}$ to be equal to $U$. I'm looking now at the surface of a
sphere with a certain radius.

If we have one particle in one dimension, we have only one momentum
space. In large dimensions, $g \propto \frac{V^NU^{3(N-1)/2}}{h^{3N}}$.

[ Reasoning: for momentum integral: we need to conserve energy. ]

[ We are basically speaking of the surface of a volume in 3N-space. ]

$\sigma = \frac{S}{k} = \log(g) = \log(V^N U^{3N/2}) + \text{const}
  = N\log(V) + \frac{3N}{2}\log(U) + \text{const}.$

In that case, can write $dU = TdS - pdV$. Or, if you prefer, $\tau d\sigma
- pdV$.

Solve for U: $U = A\exp(2\sigma/3N)V^{-2/3}$.

$\tau = \pderiv{U}{\sigma(V, \sigma, N)} = \frac{2U}{3N} \iff U =
\frac{3NkT}{2}$.

$p = -\pderiv{U(V, \sigma, N)}{V} = \frac{2U}{3V} \iff pV = N\tau ≡ NkT$.
