Physics 112: Statistical Mechanics
==================================
Entropy and Stuff. Feb 6, 2012
------------------------------

[[ Talk about clickers. ]]

So far:
-------

$\sigma = -\sum p \log p$ ✓

H theorem: with an isolated system, probabilities of states evolve to being
equal.

Consequence of the H theorem: If I am looking at the probability of a
configuration, the probability is equal to (states in configuration) /
(total states)

$\sigma = \log (g_t)$ (mathematically equivalent to the first statement)

Counting of states to get the entropy.

Density of orbitals (quantum spatial wave functions) in phase space is
$\frac{1}{h^d}$ (dimension of space)

Once again: phase space $\equiv$ position space (x) $\otimes$ (p) momentum
space. Good way to compute the number of spatial states. degrees of freedom
(spin, rotation, vibration).

Number of states g(spatial states) of a system of energy U in a volume

V is $g ∼ U^{3N/2}V^N = \exp(\sigma). \tau \equiv kT, \sigma \equiv \frac{S}{k}$

$\tau = \pderiv{U}{\sigma}|_V \implies U = \frac{3}{2}N\tau$

$P = -\pderiv{U}{V}|_\sigma \implies PV = N\tau$

Just as natural, if not more so, to work with $\sigma(U,V) \equiv
\log(V^N U^(3N/2))$.

**We must be careful to note, when working with partial derivatives,
  which variables we are keeping constant.**

This is a very useful way of defining pressure and temperature once we have
counted states.

$\tau = \frac{1}{\pderiv{\sigma}{U}|_{V,N}}, p = \tau \pderiv{\sigma}{V}|_{U,N}$

We were starting with the phase space for our $N$ particles: $\frac{d^{3N}x
d^{3N}p}{h^{3N}}$: density of our states. We want to then integrate over
the volume, but we choose the states such that U fixed. Represents in our
3N-dimensional momentum space a sphere.

$\delta[\sqrt{\sum\sum p^2_{ik} - \sqrt{2MU}]$. Take advantage of sifting
property of $\delta$.

radius of sphere in 3N momentum space. r has dimension $r^{d-1}$. In the
general case, we'll have $\Omega^{3N}r^{3N-1}$.

Thus we have $\frac{\Omega^{3N}\sqrt{(2MU)^{3N-1}}}{h^{3N}}$.

$\delta$ has dimension of $\frac{1}{p}$. $\int \delta(x)dp = 1$

Sackur Tetrode formula: entropy of an ideal gas. $\frac{S}{k} =
N(\log(\frac{n_Q}{n}) + 5/2)$
