Physics 112: Statistical Mechanics
==================================
Entropy and Stuff. Feb 8, 2012
------------------------------

Divide $g_{t}$ by a missing $N!$, which is from indistinguishability of
particles / quantum states. Also, experiments were off by a very large
factor.

$g_t = \Omega_{3N}\sqrt{2M\Delta U}V^N U^{3(N-1)/2}/(N!h^{3N})$

Quantum density. What remains of our counting states.

$\sigma = N(\log(n_Q/n) + 5/2)$.

$n = N/V$, $n{Q} = \parens{\frac{2\pi M}{h²} \frac{2U}{3N}}^{3/2}$

Free expansion of gas (isolated system ⇒ no particle/heat exchange): final
temperature = initial temperature.

Entropy is increasing, however, since volume is increasing.

Chapter Three:

Equilibrium, Thermodynamics, Potential
======================================

RECALL:

$\frac{1}{\tau} = \pderiv{\sigma}{U}|_{V,N}$

$\frac{p}{\tau} = \pderiv{\sigma}{V}|_{U,N}$

$\frac{\mu}{\tau} = -\pderiv{\sigma}{N}|_{U,V}$

For an ideal gas in 3-space:

$$
U = \frac{3}{2}N\tau
\\ \tau \equiv kT
\\ pV = N\tau
$$

States of a combination of two systems
--------------------------------------

Take 2 systems and put them in contact.

Put them in weak interactions $U = U_1 + U_2, V = V_1 + V_2, N = N_1 + N_2$

Number of states $g_1(U_1,V_1,N_1)$, $g_2(U_2,V_2,N_2)$. Weak interaction ⇒
quantum states are not modified.

How many states do we have in the combined system?
$g_1g_2$

What is the configuration of maximum probability? The number of states in
$g(U_1,V_1,N_1)/g_t$. Take a derivative with respect to $U_1$ to see where
the extremum of this function is.

$$
\pderiv{g_1}{U_1} g_2 + g_1 \pderiv{g_2}{U_1} ≡ 0.
\\ \pderiv{g_1}{U_1} g_2 - g_1 \pderiv{g_2}{U_2} = 0.
\\ \frac{1}{g_1}\pderiv{g_1}{U_1} = \frac{1}{g_2}\pderiv{g_2}{U_2}.
\\ \pderiv{\log(g_1)}{U_1} = \pderiv{\log(g_2)}{U_2}.
\\ \pderiv{\sigma_1}{U_1} = \pderiv{\sigma_2}{U_2}.
\frac{1}{\tau_1} = \frac{1}{\tau_2}.
$$
