Physics 137A: Quantum Mechanics
===============================
Wednesday, February 8
---------------------

Harmonic oscillator

	V(x)| __          ____
		|/  \        /
		|    |   ___/
		|    \__/
		|_________________
						 x

This potential is symmetric in momentum and position. A wave packet in
coordinate space, if you Fourier-transform it, is the same wave packet is
momentum space. Has this property that if you want to do many-body physics
(not in this class) and use as a basis the harmonic oscillator, then you
get nice stuff that happens. One of the great things about the harmonic
oscillator is that, say you have 3 particles. Three coordinates describing
them. Most of the time, you're not interested in said coordinates, but
rather what the wave function looks like. Take out center-of-mass
motion. You have the same problem in general many-body theory. Excitations
in nucleus, whatever. Would love to have a big set of basis states where
you could write things down simply and just work with the interesting
part. The harmonic oscillator allows you to do that. For all these reasons
this problem is actually important, but you don't see them in the
textbook. tl;dr: this makes life easier when you get to harder problems.

You recognize such a potential because of springs. W = kx²/2. Because the
potential is quadratic, the restoring force is linear. You can calculate
the frequency ω ≡ √(k/m)

Let's start by writing down the time-independent Schrödinger
equation. There's a potential term, and that we'll write as ½mω². What prof
is going to do is straight out of the book, so don't take notes. Cool.

Adding 0 and multiplying by 1: most useful math tricks.

Addition/subtraction: physicist's worst nightmare.

Regularization: it is your best friend.
