Physics 137A: Quantum Mechanics
===============================
Friday, February 10
-------------------

So, last time we were doing a harmonic oscillator. Calculation takes two
full lectures. Energy has to be quantized. Good first start. Lots of
motivation for the harmonic oscillator. Useful in general for lots of
different interactions. The first step is to define the time-independent
solutions. First thing to do is to introduce a dimensionless coordinate.

Talk about solution to simple harmonic oscillator. Why it must be a finite
polynomial (actually, no good reason -- it's just easier). how to get said
finite polynomial. numerator has to vanish. result must be either odd or
even. it's in the math. working out hermite polynomials by hand. haven't
even gotten around to the closed-form version.

(n+1)(n+2)T(n+2) = (2n+1 - 2E/ℏω)T(n)

δ(nm)√π 2ⁿn!. Orthogonal.

Recurrence relation. H{n+1} = 2yH{n} - 2n(H{n-1}.

dⁿH{n}/dn = 2nH{n-1}.

Now you just have to go ahead and plug in this formula into our wave
function. It's just a whole lot of algebra, so Haxton will just write down
the result instead of possibly getting it wrong. Will probably be in the
text.

You have to choose either a₀ or a₁ to be 0. Choosing both yields a useless
result.

blarg, orthog basis saves time.

**Protip: You can violate energy conservation as long as you don't do it
too much.**
|x| > √(ℏ/mω (2n+1)) ⇒ ∫Ψ*x²Ψdx.

whenever you have an x that is more than twice its root-mean-square, you
are violating mathematics. Which is great. This happens 11% of the
time. This is excellent.

Next Monday: calculating expectation value of p².
