Physics 137A: Quantum Mechanics
===============================
Wednesday, February 15
----------------------

Recap: free particle schrödinger equation has a set of solutions. \Psi(x) =
1/√(2π)e^{ikx}. |Ψ(x)|² = 1/2π. Not normalizable. Analogous to sin, cos
functions in a box. -∞ < k < ∞. _both signs_. E{k} = ℏ²k²/2m

Finite a box. from -πa to πa.

e^{ikx} as our wave functions.

Boundary conditions: e^{-ikπa} = e^{ikπa}. PERIOD ≡ 1/a; freq ≡ a by
construction.

We now have a discrete set of wave functions over a finite width. We know
how to normalize this. Do what we would normally do. Our interval is (as
stated earlier) [-π/a,π/a]. blah, demonstration of orthonormality. Take
limit as a → ∞.

talk about boxes. lots of handwaving. sucky explanation of δ(r).

Now that we have our δ (finally!) we can just write down the answer. Or
not.

When all the dust clears, what do you get? What we've discovered from these
arguments is that we wanted to get these a{k}. So we had the right idea,
(not really) and we worked out the math by hand and had to check for
orthonormality as opposed to completeness.

We naturally get a(k′). "If you squint at this, it looks just like our
Krönecker delta."

The final step is that we write the solution. Evolves just as you expected
it to be. Plug it back into the Schrödinger equation.

(blarg, this is the Fourier transform. Finally. The _obvious_ way to do the
problem.)

wave packets, momentum composition. blah blah blah, you can show that
they're equivalent, etc.
