Physics 137A: Quantum Mechanics
===============================
Monday, March 5
---------------
Handing back of exams.

One repeat problem on next midterm.

Chapter 3
=========
Departure from this point; beginning of chapter 3.

Last time was a brief introduction. What we did Friday: Up to now:
differential equation to stationary states. But limiting!

Friday: Found them numerically: basis, then truncated: Physics. You have to
match truncation with Physics you want to capture in the problem.

Numerically diagonalized approximate stationary states.

Why? Fun applications; introduced notions of matrix form of $T + V$,
vectors as solutions to time-independent Schr\"odinger equation.

vectors: $\alpha_i\ket{x_i}$; inner products: $\braket{\alpha}{\beta}
\equiv \alpha^\dagger \beta$: linear transformations/operators: $\op{
\alpha}$ (must be Hermitian, even). Representable by a matrix.

Our vector spaces are usually infinite. This should not confuse you.

Quantum vector spaces (Hilbert spaces -- this is technically a lie --
Hilbert spaces in this sense do not contain the zero matrix, nor are they
closed under anything -- it's really more of a k-sphere): examples:
infinite square well: $\sqrt{\frac{2}{a}} e^{i\pi nx/a}$

So we know some things about these products. The point about QM is that not
all possible functions are allowable. We know we want to be able to
calculate expectation values of things, which we measure. It's a real
number. Spectral theorem.

$\braket{\psi_m}{\psi_n} = \delta_{mn}$

What do we do when eigenvalues are degenerate?
 a) Curl up into a ball and cry.
 b) Ignore said fact.
 c) Mathematica

orthonormal basis.
