Physics 137A: Quantum Mechanics
===============================
Monday, March 12
----------------

Recap: spectral theorem; completeness of eigenfunctions.

Dirac orthonormality (consider Fourier transform)

Now it gets a little more interesting. Suppose we have some wave packet
(the book calls this generalized statistical interpretation). Not this
example, but the next which will be important. Will tell when you can label
with more than one quantum number.

Reason why this is being done is because you can start thinking about
operators abstractly. Fact that you know the general theorems that go with
any operator, etc.

Let's go through and see what he means by this idea of a generalized
statistical interpretation. Consider operator H (hamiltonian). We'll have
some wave packet $\Phi\equiv \alpha_i\ket{\phi_i}$. The expansion of this
is simply $\braKet{\Phi}{H}{\Phi}$.

There will be an eigenspectrum corresponding to all the possible outcomes
of a measurement. You'll wind up getting this completeness relationship,
where the probabilities correspond to the coefficients.

probability of a particle being at a specific point means nothing in
continuous case -- rather, we have to speak of it being found in some
interval.

Let's write out this idea of simultaneous measurements and commuting
operators.

So now let's go ahead and compute that the commutator is zero.

Another way to measure how different these eigenvectors are is to see
whether these matrices commute or not. If they commute, they have a common
set of eigenvectors. Commuting means $XZ - ZX = 0$. So we want to look at $XZ
- ZX$ (a commutator, denoted by $[X,Z]$).

So what does this look like between $\hat{x}$ and $\hat{p}$? We have product
rule coming into play... yielding $[x,p] \equiv i\hbar$.

We'll use this to derive $\Delta x\Delta p = \hbar/2$.

Recall: given an observable A and a state $\ket{Ψ}$, the expected value is
$\braKet{\Psi}{A}{\Psi}$. We also saw that the variance was $E(x^2) -
E(x)^2$, so in this case $\sigma^2 = \braKet{\Psi}{A^2}{\Psi} -
\braKet{\Psi}{A}{\Psi}^2$.

Wednesday, what we're going to do is try some derivation of what the
uncertainty principle looks like in general.
