Physics 137A: Quantum Mechanics
===============================
Wednesday, March 14
-------------------

Uncertainty relation: what is its meaning? How do you measure a particle?
Observations disturb state.

Uncertainty principle is why we exist. Hydrogen atom: proton surrounded by
some electron orbit. THe size of the proton is roughly $10^{-15} m$, or one
fm (fermi, as we come to know it). THe electron sits a distance $a_0$ (Bohr
radius) away from the proton, roughly $5 \cdot 10^{-11}$. Pauli exclusion
principle leads to repulsive force. 1931: Ehrenfest postulated. Later,
1967: Freeman Dyson along with collaborator A. Lenard proved that this
causes normal force: matter would be much squishier.

H = T + V. We know $T = \frac{p^2}{2m}$, and V is given by $-\frac{e^2}{r
4\pi\epsilon_0}$. We thus have $\int d^3x \Psi^*\parens{-\frac{\hbar^2}
{2m}\nabla^2 \Psi}$. This is roughly $R$. Then we know the kinetic energy,
which is the sum of all the momenta, $\frac{1}{2m}\avg{p_x^2 + p_y^2 +
p_z^2} = \frac{1}{2m}3\frac{\hbar^2}{4R^2} \approx \frac{3}{8}
\frac{\hbar^2}{mR^2}$. So $\avg{H} \approx \frac{3}{8}\frac{\hbar^2}{mR^2}
- \frac{e^2}{R4\pi\epsilon_0}$. $\pderiv{}{R}\avg{H} = 0$. Therefore $R =
  \frac{3}{4}\frac{\hbar^2}{mc\alpha}$. 

Two good examples of generalizing uncertainty in text. Decay,
travel.

There's another uncertainty relation that's common to write down, i.e. the
time-energy uncertainty principle. Time scale for observable quantity:
width of particle inversely proportional to lifetime.

Let's do a more specific example: consider a wave function given by the
following gaussian wave packet: $\phi = \frac{e^{-(x - x_0)^2 / 2a^2}
e^{ip_0x/\hbar}}{(\pi a^2)^{1/4}}$. What is the uncertainty in the position
of the particle?

$\sigma_x = \frac{a}{\sqrt{2}}$.

Assume we have an infinite hilbert space. Note that one is represented by
$\infint dx \abs{xXx}$.

Dirac's bra-ket Notation
========================

talk about finding eigenvalues and eigenvectors. $\ketbra{i}{j}H_{ij}$.

Note that $\braket{i}{j} = \delta_{ij}$

More bra-ket notation. Basis must span Hilbert space. Completeness
relation.
