Physics 137A: Quantum Mechanics
===============================
Monday, March 19
----------------

Recaps. Uncertainty principle at multiple places. Showed that if you show
momentum acting on Gaussian, it's effectively $-\frac{\hbar}{i} \frac{1}{2
\sigma_x^2} \hat{x}$. Showed that inequality became an equality, so our
fudging worked just fine.

Time dependence shows up explicitly in some operators; none that we've
encountered thus far.

Two things to take away: $\pderiv{}{t}\avg{\hat{Q}_H} = \frac{i}{\hbar}
\avg{\comm{\hat{H}}{\hat{Q}_H}} + \avg{\pderiv{Q_H^\prime}{t}}$. We can use
this to derive the generalized uncertainty principle: $\sigma_H^2\sigma_Q^2
\ge \avg{\frac{1}{2i}\comm{H}{\hat{Q}}}^2\implies \sigma_H\sigma_Q \ge
\frac{\hbar}{2}\abs{\pderiv{\avg{\hat{Q}}}{t}}$. Using this for energy and
time, we show that we've also got a time-energy uncertainty principle.

Interesting things that aren't stationary: e.g. 2p in hydrogen. Somewhat
important, since using a laser, one thing you want to do is pump hydrogen
to an excited state.

Talk about lifetimes being $\delta t \approx \frac{1}{\omega}$.

Bandgaps. Slowing down of atoms. Doppler shift.

More dimensions! Toy models.

Spherical symmetry.

Schrodinger equation in three dimensions: just replace $x$ with
$\vec{r}$. Thus $\pderiv{}{x} \to \nabla$.

We have a different normalization, now: it's now an integral over ALL
SPACE. Same reasoning: particle must be *somewhere*. So, as before, we can
take our wave function and write $\Psi(\vec{r},t) = \psi(\vec{r})
e^{-iEt/\hbar}$. Plug this in, and we get the time-dependent Schrodinger
equation.

Solve this equation, and we'll get the stationary states.

Hydrogen atom! Make use of fact that we'll have various conserved
quantities. This is why we talked about commutators and stuff. Angular
momentum and stuff.

One very interesting class of problems: $V(r)$ (not $\vec{r}$). For
instance, $V = \frac{\alpha}{r}$.
