Physics 137A: Quantum Mechanics
===============================
Monday, April 2
---------------

for small r, the singular parts have to be equal. We know that $U_l$ looks
like $Ar^{l+1} + Br^{-l}$. The second term has to be zero, since that
would diverge.

First example we can solve: analogue of infinite square well. Inifnite
potential beyond $r = a$. Conceptually: confinement of particle in 3-D. Now
confined in three dimensions.

Introduce wave number $k = \frac{\sqrt{2mE}}{\hbar}$. $\deriv{^2 u}{r^2} =
\bracks{\frac{l(l+1)}{r^2} - k^2}u$. $u(r) = A\sin kr + B\cos kr$. B must
be zero, since wave function is zero at origin. At $r = a$, wave function
must also vanish. So we must have $ka = n\pi$. So you have your
quantization, so your energies are $E = \frac{\hbar^2 k^2 a^2}{2ma^2} =
\frac{\hbar^2 n^2 \pi^2}{2ma^2}$. We've learned that the difference between
one-dimensional and three-dimensional case is angular momentum, but there
is no angular momentum in an s wave. So this looks very similar to infinite
square well: we just have the additional boundary condition that $u(0) =
0$.

So the total solution for this, $\Psi_{nlm}(\vec{r}) = \sqrt{\frac{2}{a}}
Y_{00}(nx) \frac{\sin(n\pi r/a)}{r} = \sqrt{\frac{2}{a}}\frac{\sin(n\pi
r/a)}{\sqrt{4\pi}{r}}$.

spherical bessel function -- sinc?

$\Psi_{n00}(\vec{r} = \frac{1}{\sqrt{2\pi a}}\frac{n\pi}{a} \sinc(\frac
{nr}{a}) = n\sqrt{\frac{\pi}{2}} \frac{1}{a^{3/2}} J_0(\kappa r); \kappa
\equiv \frac{n\pi}{a}$

$J_0$ is our spherical Bessel function. Two places: scattering (coming in
with plane wave, outgoing wave is spherically symmetric wave function that
spreads out from the scatterer, so write as plane wave and stuff
(e.g. $e^{i\vec{k}\cdot \vec{r}} = \sum_{lm} Y_{lm}(\theta, \phi)Y^*_{lm}
(\theta_k, \phi_k)$ -- turns into a Bessel function).

General problem we actually wanted to solve: $\bracks{\deriv{^2}{r^2} + k^2
- \frac{\ell(\ell + 1)}{r^2}}u_\ell(r) = 0$. This leads to
  $\bracks{r^2\deriv{^2}{r^2} + 2r\deriv{}{r} + k^2r^2 - \ell(\ell + 1)}
  R_{n\ell} = 0 \implies \bracks{k^2r^2\deriv{^2}{k^2r^2} + 2kr\deriv{}{kr}
  + k^2r^2 - \ell(\ell + 1)} R_{n\ell} \\ = 0 = \bracks{z^2\deriv{^2}{z^2} +
  2z\deriv{}{z} + z^2 - \ell(\ell + 1)} R_{n\ell}(z)$.

Indeed, there are two classes of solutions: "good" and "bad"
solutions. General form is going to be $R_{n\ell}(kr) = AJ_\ell(kr) +
Bn_\ell (kr)$. $n_\ell$ is a different spherical Bessel function that is
poorly-behaved, Another set of Bessel functions called the spherical Hankel
functions. This is one particular case where they map onto sinusoids; the
case where they map onto complex exponentials corresponds to the Hankel
functions.

The $J_\ell$ are our good solutions; the $n_\ell$ ($n_0 =
-\frac{\cos(x)}{x}$) are our bad functions.

$J_1(x) = \frac{\sin x}{x^2} - \frac{\cos x}{x}$, $n_1(x) = -\frac{\cos
x}{x^2} - \frac{\sin x}{x}$. Recursion formula (not in the book): $f_{\ell
+ 1}(x) = \frac{2\ell + 1}{x}f_\ell(x) - f_{\ell-1}(x)$.

For small x, $J_\ell(x) \approx \frac{x^\ell}{(2\ell + 1)!!}$.

Note that in the general case, $AJ_\ell(ka) = 0$. Eigenvalue problem for
all $\ell$. So what you need to do is find the math tables. Find the
$B_{n\ell}$, which are the $n^{th}$ zeros of the $\ell^{th}$ spherical
Bessel functions.
