Physics 137A: Quantum Mechanics
===============================
Monday, April 16
================
Think about $e^{i\vec{k} \cdot \vec{r}}\vec{\sigma}$.

Recap: commutators. raising/lowering (ladder) operators. Levi-Civitta
tensor. Maximal commuting set of operators.

Ladder operators anti-hermitian (skew-hermitian). Have very interesting
property.

Couple things to think about. Phase transitions.

We now have a really interesting trick: if we wanted to, we could have
write this $\ket{lm} \equiv \parens{L_-}^{l-m}\ket{ll}$.

Maybe we can avoid some algebra. Invoke Wigner-Eckart theorem?

Two states with just one value of $m$. Must somehow be able to do these
operations efficiently.

Choice of bases is just a matter of convention. Underlying all of this must
be some result, some physical quantity that is independent of your
coordinate system. This is how you figure it out.

All of these matrix elements -- I'll write down the notation -- can be
written as a single element with no dependence on $m$ (3-j symbol?).

Will see this stuff if you start to use it in practical
applications. Annoying, lots of algebra, but you get simple results that
allow you to do more stuff efficiently.

PREVIOUSLY in quantum mechanics: we wrote down $L^2 = (\vec{x} \times p)^2$
and stuff.

These are not pulled out of a hat: written out because we know what these
are in Cartesian coordinates, and we know how to transform from Cartesian
to spherical. Not doing derivation because that has nothing to do with
quantum mechanics. One of the problems for next homework: raising and
lowering operators in $L_\pm \equiv \pm \hbar e^{\pm i\phi}\parens{
\pderiv{}{\theta} \pm i\cos\theta\pderiv{}{itheta}}$.

Zeeman: decided to break spherical symmetry by putting hydrogen atom in
a magnetic field. Nice discretisation.

First observed by Pauli: looks like you missed a quantum number. When you
plot magnetic field, you see twice the number of states.

Talk about Alfred Landay. Pauli also coming at that time (just a kid at
that time, evidently, but did stuff like a paper on special
relativity). Missing quantum number?! Electron spin. Thought about this
classically. Idea was basically very interesting: source of this extra
quantum number. (internal!). Electrons had to have half-integer spins (from
Zeeman effect): here you would have two quantum numbers. Got 2 initially
for g-factor -- surprising quantum-mechanically. Applied to other problem:
fine structure splitting. Explained another factor explained by magnetic
moments. Needed a different value of g-factor (1). Pauli had two objections:
couldn't be right, since they were different values, and only one valid
radius you could use: $r = \frac{e^2}{m c^2}$.

Figuring out how fast this surface was rotating, had to be 100x speed of
light. Special relativity says this is impossible. Told same thing to Niels
Bohr,

Nine months later, two guys in Holland (also very young) had exactly the
same idea: had notion that there must be a new quantum number, almost must
be spin; talked to their boss Ehrenfest. Said it was either nonsense or
very important. Then said to talk to most famous Dutch theorist at the time
Lorentz. Lorentz said everything was nonsense. Turns out this wasn't
stupid: within two years they figured out problems. First, not classical
spin. Also had interaction that looked like inner product between spin and
angular momentum. This is what gives the fine structure splitting.

Should have used Dirac's equation: need relativity.

Nobody ever heard about the guy who actually discovered spin. Moral: don't
listen to anyone over 30, and publish if you have something to discuss.

If you want a fantastic review article (just wonderful), Jean Cummins from
the atomic group. Coming out in a couple months. Called "electron
spin". Talking about how theories were broken. How to fix in new QM.

So what is this spin? The idea is that spin is an intrinsic quantity and
quantum-mechanical, so don't try to think of it as a spinning soccer
ball. Same algebra. What we're going to do is build this with something
that we do have classical relations for, i.e. orbital angular momentum. Go
through cyclical permutations, and this again can be summarized in this
relationship that $\comm{S_i}{S_j} \equiv i\hbar\epsilon_{ijk}S_k$. Once
again, you can choose eigenfunctions with quantum numbers $s,
m_s$. Electron has  $s = \frac{1}{2}$ (fermions).

Diagonal quantum numbers: $s^2\ket{s m_s}= \frac{3}{4}\hbar^2 \ket{s m_s}$,
$s_z \ket{s m_s} \equiv \hbar m \ket{s m_s}$. You can do raising and
lowering operators just as before: mimic what we did with angular orbital
momentum. All particles are fundamental: point-like. Test with $e^\pm,
\mu^\pm, \tau^\pm$ (electrons, muons, tauons). Quarks: u,d/c,s/t,b. All of
these constitute our fermions.

We also have $\gamma, w^\pm, z$: our bosons.

Composite particles act just like elementary particles. The theory
(i.e. SM) thinks that various fermions (i.e. electrons, muons, tauons) are
also composed of quarks.

Spin-up, spin-down wave functions.
