Physics 137A: Quantum Mechanics
===============================
Friday, April 27
================

spin combinations, parity, stuff. spans space. doesn't have good symmetry
under imagined operators.

Annihilation of conjugate coordinates: discrete Fourier transforms and
stuff. $M = m_1 + m_2$, $\mu = \frac{m_1m_2}{m_1 + m_2}}$.

center of mass and stuff. Two-body problem.

$\frac{1}{\Psi(R)} \frac{p^2}{2M}\Psi_{cm} = E_{cm}$.

$\frac{1}{\Psi(r)} \parens{\frac{p^2}{2M} + \gamma} \Psi_{rel} = E_{rel}$.

$E = E_{rel} + E_{cm}$.

Everything on the one-body problem maps directly onto the two-body
problem. There's one small difference: we can claim we're not interested in
the center-of-mass motion. We want to know the intrinsic structure, so we
can just worry about the relative motion.

In addition, there's spin. There are now two spins. $\ket{nlm; s_1m_{s1}
s_2m_{s2}}$.

Bosons and fermions. If you use separation of variables for
$\Psi(\vec{r_1}, \vec{r_2})$, what does this wave function have to look
like if we require symmetry? This wave function has probably one of two
possibilities: we exchange quantum numbers, or we introduce a minus
sign. Symmetric or antisymmetric under interchange of particle quantum
numbers.

Powerful theorem: depending on particle, only one is possible. Bosons: must
build symmetry under interchange. Fermions: must be antisymmetric.

Spin triplet state is even under particle exchange, and spin singlet is odd
under particle exchange.

Symmetry: can interchange. Have another spin buried in that Pauli
originally introduced. Now you have this proton neutron stuff and can just
continue. When you introduce the labels, each of these states ends up being
antisymmetric.
