CS 150 - Digital Design
=======================
August 23, 2012
-----------------

30 lab stations. Initially, individual, but later will partner up. Can
admit up to 60 people -- limit. Waitlist + enrolled is a little over
that. Lab lecture that many people miss: Friday 2-3. Specific lab sections
(that you're in). Go to the assigned section at least for the first several
weeks.

This is a lab-intensive course. You will get to know 125 Cory very
well. Food and drink on round tables only. Very reasonable policy.

As mentioned: first few are individual labs, after that you'll pair up for
the projects. The right strategy is to work really hard on the first few
labs so you look good and get a good partner.

The book is Harris & Harris, Computer Design & Architecture.

Reading: (skim chapter 1, read section 5.6.2 on FPGAs) -- H&H, start to
look at Ch. 5 of the Virtex User's Guide.

H&H Ch. 2 is on combinational circuits. Assuming you took 61C, not doing
proofs of equivalence, etc.

Ch. 3 is sequential logic. Combinational is history-agnostic; sequential
allows us to store state (dynamical time-variant system).

With memory and a NAND gate, you can make everything.

Chapter 4 is HDLs. Probably good to flip through for now. We're going to
use Verilog this semester. Book gives comparisons between Verilog and VHDL.

First lab next week, you will be writing simple Verilog code to implement
simple boolean functions. 5 is building blocks like ALUs. 6 is
architecture. 7, microarchitecture: why does it work, and how do you make
pipelined processors. May find there's actually code useful to final
project. Chapter 8 is on memory.

Would suggest that you read the book sooner rather than later. Can sit down
in first couple of weeks and read entire thing through.

Lecture notes: will be using the whiteboard. If you want lecture notes, go
to the web. Tons of resources out there. If there's something particular
about the thing Kris says, use *Piazza*. Probably used several times by
now, so not an issue.

Cheating vs. collaboration: link on website that points to Kris's version
of a cheating policy.

Grading! There will be homeworks, and there will probably be homework
quizzes (a handful, so probably 10 + 5%). There will be a midterm at least
(possibly two), so that's like 15%. Labs and project are like 10 and 30%,
and the final is 30%.

Couple things to note: lab is very important, because this is a lab
course. If you take the final and the midterm and the quizzes into account,
that's 50% of your grade.

Lab lecture in this room (306 Soda, F 2-3p). Will probably have five weeks
of lab lecture. Section's 3-4. Starting tomorrow.

Office hours to be posted -- as soon as website is up. Hopefully by
tomorrow morning.

King Silicon
------------

FINFETs (from Berkeley, in use by Intel). Waht can you do with 22nm tech?
Logic? You get something more than $10^6$ digital gates per $mm^2$. SRAM,
you get something like $10 Mb/mm^2$, Flash and DRAM, you get something like
$10 MB/mm^2$. You want to put your MIPS processor on there, or a 32-bit ARM
Cortex? A small but efficient machine? On the order of $10^5$ gates, so
about $0.1 mm^2$. Don't need a whole lot of RAM and flash for your
program. Maybe a megabit of RAM, a megabyte of flash, and that adds up to
$0.3 mm^2$. Even taking into account cost of packaging and testing, you're
making a chip for a few pennies.

Think of the cell phone: processor surrounded by a whole bunch of
peripherals. I/O devices (speakers, screens, LEDs, buzzer; microphone,
keypad, buttons, N-megapixel camera, 3-axis accelerometer, 3-axis
gyroscope, 3-axis magnetometer, touchscreen, etc), networking devices
(cell, Wifi, bluetooth, etc), Cool thing here is that it means that you can
get all of these sensors in a little chip package. Something:
microprocessor in general will not want direct interface. A whole cloud of
"glue logic" that frees the processor from having to deal with
idiosyncrasies of these things. Lots of different interfaces that you have
to deal with. Another way of looking at this: microprocessor at the core,
glue logic around the outside of that, that is talking to the analog
circuitry, which talks to the actual transducers (something has to do
conversions between different energy domains).

another way of looking at this is that you have this narrow waist of
microprocessors, which connects all of this stuff. the real reason we do
this is to get up to software. one goal of this class is to make you
understand the tradeoffs between hw and sw. hw is faster, lower power,
cheaper, more accurate (several axes: timing, sw is more flexible. if we
knew everything people wanted to do, we'd put it in hw. everything is
better in hw, except when you put it in hw, it's fixed. in general, you've
got a bunch more people working in sw than in hw. this class is nice in
that it connects these two worlds.

if you can cross that bridge and understand how to understand a software
problem in hardware design stages, or solve a hw bug through software, you
can be the magician.

what we're going to do this semester in the project is similar to previous
projects in that we'll have a mips processor. looks like a 3-stage pipeline
design, and we'll have you do a bunch of hardware interfaces (going across
the hw/sw boundary, not into analog obviously). we have, for example,
video: we might do audio out. we'll do a keyboard for sure and a
timer. there's some things in here; all of this will end up being
memory-mapped io so that software on the processor can get to it, and it'll
also have interrupts (exceptions). not that many people who understand
interrupts and can design that interface well so that sw people are happy
with it.

You will *not* be wiring up chips on breadboards (or protoboards), the way
we used to in this class. You'll be writing in Verilog. You'll basically be
using a text editor to write Verilog, which is a HDL. There's a couple of
forms: one is a structural one, where you actually specify the nodes. First
lab you'll do that, but afterwards, you'll be working at a behavioral
level. You'll let the synthesis engine figure out how to take that
high-level description and turn it into the right stuff in the target
technology. Has to do a mapping function, and eventually a place & route.

Lot of logic. Whole bunch of underlying techs you might map to, and in the
end, you might go to an IC where there's some cell library that the
particular foundry gives you. Very different than if you're mapping to a
FPGA, which is what you'll be doing this semester. Job of the synthesis
tool to turn text into right set of circuits, and that goes into simulation
engine(s), and it lets you go around one of these loops in minutes for
small designs, hours for larger designs, and iterate on your design and
make sure it's right.

Some of you have used LTSpice and are used to using drawing to get a
schematic, and that's another way to get into this kind of system as well,
but that's structural. A big part of this course, unfortunately, is
learning and understanding how these tools work: how I go through the
simulation and synthesis process.

The better you get at navigating the software, the better a digital
designer you'll be. Painful truth of it all. Reality is that this is
exactly the way it works in industry. Nature of the IC CAD world. Something
like a $10B/yr industry. Whole lot better than plugging into a board.

FPGA board: fast and cheap upfront, but expensive per part. Other part of
spectrum is to go with an IC or application-specific integrated circuit
(ASIC), which is slow and costly upfront, but cheap per unit. Something in
between: use an FPGA + commercial off-the-shelf chips, and a custom
PCB. Still expensive per part (less so), but it's pretty fast.

FPGA? Field-programmable gate array. The core of an FPGA is the
configurable logic block. The whole idea behind a CLB is that you have the
dataplane, where you have a bunch of digital inputs to the box, and some
number of outputs in the data plane, and there's a separate control plane
(configuration) that's often loaded from a ROM or flash chip externally
when the chip boots up. Depending on what you put in, it can look
different. Fast, since it's implemented at the HW level.

If you take a bunch of CLBs and put them in an array, and you put a bunch
of wiring through that array, that is configurable wiring.

If we made this chip and went through the process, when we turned it into a
single chip, we'd take everything we put into this, it'd be less than a
square millimeter of 22nm silicon.

Talk about how FPGAs make it easy to connect external devices to a
microprocessor.

Course material: we can start from systems perspective: systems are
composed of datapath and control (FSM), or we can start from the very
bottom: transistors compose gates, which get turned into registers and
combinational logic, which gets turned into state and next state logic,
which make up the control. Also, storage and math/ALU (from registers and
combinational logic) makes up the datapath.

