CS 150: Digital Design & Computer Architecture
==============================================
September 20, 2012
------------------

Non-overlapping clocks. n-phase means that you've got n different outputs,
and at most one high at any time. Guaranteed dead time between when one
goes low and next goes high.

K-maps
------
Finding minimal sum-of-products and product-of-sums expressions for
functions. **On-set**: all the ones of a function; **implicant**: one or
more circled ones in the onset; a **minterm** is the smallest implicant you
can have, and they go up by powers of two in the number of things you can
have; a **prime implicant** can't be combined with another (by circling);
an **essential prime implicant** is a prime implicant that contains at
least one one not in any other prime implicant. A **cover** is any
collection of implicants that contains all of the ones in the on-set, and a
**minimal cover** is one made up of essential prime implicants and the
minimum number of implicants.

Hazards vs. glitches. Glitches are when timing issues result in dips (or
spikes) in the output; hazards are if they might happen. Completely
irrelevant in synchronous logic.

Project
-------
3-stage pipeline MIPS150 processor. Serial port, graphics accelerator. If
we look at the datapath elements, the storage elements, you've got your
program counter, your instruction memory, register file, and data
memory. Figure 7.1 from the book. If you mix that in with figure 8.28,
which talks about MMIO, that data memory, there's an address and data bus
that this is hooked up to, and if you want to talk to a serial port on a
MIPS processor (or an ARM processor, or something like that), you don't
address a particular port (not like x86). Most ports are
memory-mapped. Actually got a MMIO module that is also hooked up to the
address and data bus. For some range of addresses, it's the one that
handles reads and writes.

You've got a handful of different modules down here such as a UART receive
module and a UART transmit module. In your project, you'll have your
personal computer that has a serial port on it, and that will be hooked up
to your project, which contains the MIPS150 processor. Somehow, you've got
to be able to handle characters transmitted in each direction.

UART
----
Common ground, TX on one side connected to RX port on other side, and vice
versa. Whole bunch more in different connectors. Basic protocol is called
RS232, common (people often refer to it by connector name: DB9 (rarely
DB25); fortunately, we've moved away from this world and use USB. We'll
talk about these other protocols later, some sync, some async. Workhorse
for long time, still all over the place.

You're going to build the UART receiver/transmitter and MMIO module that
interfaces them. See when something's coming in from software /
hardware. Going to start out with polling; we will implement interrupts
later on in the project (for timing and serial IO on the MIPS
processor). That's really the hardcore place where software and hardware
meet. People who understand how each interface works and how to use those
optimally together are valuable and rare people.

What you're doing in Lab 4, there's really two concepts of (1) how does
serial / UART work and (2) ready / valid handshake.

On the MIPS side, you've got some addresses. Anything that starts with FFFF
is part of the memory-mapped region. In particular, the first four are
mapped to the UART: they are RX control, RX data, TX control, and TX data.

When you want to send something out the UART, you write the byte -- there's
just one bit for the control and one byte for data.

Data goes into some FSM system, and you've got an RX shift register and a
TX shift register.

There's one other piece of this, which is that inside of here, the thing
interfacing to this IO-mapped module uses this ready bit. If you have two
modules: a source and a sink (diagram from the document), the source has
some data that is sending out, tells the sink when the data is valid, and
the sink tells the source when it is ready. And there's a shared "clock"
(baud rate), and this is a synchronous interface.

* source presents data
* source raises valid
* when ready & valid on posedge clock, both sides know the transaction was
  successful.

Whatever order this happens in, source is responsible for making sure data
is valid.

HDLC? Takes bytes and puts into packets, ACKs, etc.

Talk about quartz crystals, resonators. $\pi \cdot 10^7$.

So: before I let you go, parallel load, n bits in, serial out, etc.
