UART, MIPS and Timing
=====================
September 25, 2012
------------------

Timing: motivation for next lecture (pipelining). Lot of online resources
(resources, period) on MIPS. Should have lived + breathed this thing during
61C. For sure, you've got your 61C lecture notes and CS150 lecture notes
(both from last semester). Also the green card (reference) and there's
obviously the book. Should have tons of material on the MIPS processor out
there.

So, from last time: we talked about a universal asynchronous receiver
transmitter. On your homework, I want you to draw a couple of boxes
(control and datapath; they exchange signals). Datapath is mostly shift
registers. May be transmitting and receiving at same time; one may be idle;
any mix. Some serial IO lines going to some other system not synchronized
with you. Talked about clock and how much clock accuracy you need. For
eight-bit, you need a couple percent matching parity. In years past, we've
used N64 game controllers as input for the project. All they had was an RC
relaxation oscillator. Had same format: start bit, two data bits, and stop
bit. Data was sent Manchester-coded (0 -> 01; 1: 10). In principle, I can
have a 33% error, which is something I can do with an RC oscillator.

Also part of the datapath, 8-bit data going in and out. Whatever, going to
be MIPS interface. Set of memory-mapped addresses on the MIPS, so you can
read/write on the serial port. Also some ready/valid stuff up
here. Parallel data to/from MIPS datapath.

MIPS: invented by our own Dave Patterson and John Henessey from
Stanford. Started company, Kris saw business plan. Was confidential, now
probably safe to talk about. Started off and said they're going to end up
getting venture capital, and VCs going to take equity, which is going to
dilute their equity. Simple solution, don't take venture money. These guys
have seen enough of this. By the time they're all done, it would be awesome
if they each had 4% of the company. They set things up so that they started
at 4%. Were going to allocate 20% for all of the employees, series A going
to take half, series B, they'll give up a third, and C, 15%. Interesting
bit about MIPS that you didn't learn in 61C.

One of the resources, the green sheet, once you've got this thing, you know
a whole bunch about the processor. You know you've got a program counter
over here, and you've got a register file in here, and how big it
is. Obviously you've got an ALU and some data memory over here, and you
know the instruction format. You don't explicitly know that you've got a
separate instruction memory (that's a choice you get to make as an
implementor); you don't know how many cycles it'll be (or pipelined,
etc). People tend to have separate data and instruction memory for embedded
systems, and locally, it looks like separate memories (even on more
powerful systems).

We haven't talked yet about what a register file looks like inside. Not
absolute requirement about register file, but it would be nice if your
register file had two read and one write address.

We go from a D-ff, and we know that sticking an enable line on there lets
us turn this into a D-ff with enable. Then if I string 32 of these in
parallel, I now have a register (clocked), with a write-enable on it.

Not going to talk about ALU today: probably after midterm.

So now, I've got a set of 32 registers. Considerations of cost. Costs on
the order of a hundredth of a cent.

Now I've made my register file. How big is that logic? NAND gates to
implement a 5->32 bit decoder.

Asynchronous reads. At the rising edge of the clock, synchronous write.

So, now we get back to MIPS review. The MIPS instrctions, you've got
R/I/J-type instructions. All start with opcode (same length: 6 bits). Tiny
fraction of all 32-bit instructions.

More constraints as we get more stuff. If we then want to constrain that
this is a single-cycle processor, then you end up with a pretty clear
picture of what you want. PC doesn't need 32 bits (two LSBs are always 0);
can implement PC with a counter.

PC goes into instruction memory, and out comes my instruction. If, for
example, we want to execute `LW $s0 12(%s3)`, then we look at the green
card, and it tells us the RTL.

Adding R-type to the I-type datapath adds three muxes. Not too bad.
