MMIO
====
October 4, 2012
---------------

Section 8.5. Not exactly perfect; we'll talk a bit about that this lecture,
but it gives you a good idea how that works. Talk a little bit about
3-stage pipeline and look at what happens if you put the regfile next to
the ALU instead of next to the instruction memory.

Last time, we had IMEM, Regfile, ALU all by itself, and then data memory
all over there. Let's now see what happens if we stick the regfile and ALU
together. Not at all clear to me on the FPGA you've got whether there's
going to be a substantial benefit to one or the other. Don't think it's
going to affect speed or complexity tremendously.

What you should be doing for your project is draw the basic single-cycle
MIPS (figure 7.11?), then add pipeline registers, label every single wire
in there; everything should be lined up; make sure that you put ALUOut
(there's going to be more than one of those: it's going to cross from the
execution phase to the memory phase, and so you're going to have at least
two of these.

Good midterm question: you decide you're going to forward. If we choose to
do that, what is $T_{c,min}$ in this case?

Note: memory map in book is not the same as what we're using in the
project, but the concepts are all the same. So we've got a text segment
where the program actually goes; your global variables have some place in
here, and you initialize `$gp` to that, and the top chunk is the I/O (called
reserved in their diagram. You've got the heap that grows up, and the stack
that grows down. It's this region where you've got your MMIO, and I want to
make this clear what's going on.

From the book, figure 8.28, you've got your ALU, regfile, muxes, and
there's two things that come out of here that are important when you're
doing a read or a write. You've got the address, and you've got a `DataIn`
if you're doing a write, and there's your memory. There's also a DataOut
from memory (32 bits).

So far, we've been saying that this is just Dmem. In reality, Dmem is just
one of the things that lives in here. We've got a block that we've been
calling Dmem. There are other things: in particular, there's your UART
controller, and your UART controller has a bunch of lines that go to and
from the actual UART that you build, which has a single SIn and SOut. This
is what you connect your terminal to on this side, and there's a bunch of
things that go across this interface. Two sets of three lines to represent
the ready/valid interface.

Control line that tells the memory when to write; address and data going
into Dmem (it's only 12 bits that go in; you have to figure that out). This
guy up here, this is your decoder. You also have to have your instruction
memory live inside of here, and it for sure needs to get that Din and the
address input as well. It also only presumably has 12 bits of input for
your project, and it also has a write on it. And this controller needs to
be able to see some bits of address.

