Stack, Procedure Calls, Exceptions
==================================
October 9, 2012
---------------

The homework this week is pretty much just things you're working on: how
did you implement j and jal? We are going to talk about the stack and
procedure calls, and also exceptions (interrupts!) -- 6.7.2, 7.7. Also,
look at your green sheet.

From the book, like we drew last time, we've got our memory allocation
system that starts at 0, and somewhere way at the top, we've got FFFFFFFC,
which gets chopped up into pieces. In particular, in the normal memory map,
all of this is reserved, which ends up being memory-mapped IO devices, and
you start off with your stack pointer pointing right here at 7FFFFFFC, and
then you've got another reserved section on the bottom for text, static,
and room for your stack to grow down and your heap to grow up, and your
stack pointer and global pointer. Your program counter ends up being
initialized at the bottom of the text section.

Some differences.

How do we do procedure calls? In our book, that's section 6.4.6. We'll look
at it from the simplest no args, no ret val, then we'll see how to do args
and return values, then local and global variables. Your code is main, just
calls a function simple, and simple, which is a void, just returns.

61C material. `jr $ra`. Turns out that doesn't work for a MIPS
architecture. What is the address that goes into the return address when
this is called? 0x8: book does not have delay slots. In particular, you're
going to have to put NOPs to get this to work. Actually, at memory location
1004, you just happened to have an instruction that was all 0, except it
had a 1000 at the very end. That's `jr`, so we end up with nastiness:
infinite looping, potentially.


So suppose I have args and stuff. We end up with `\$s0 = y`. Suppose we're
at 1000, how does this thing get called? `\$a` registers, `\$v` registers. 

Utilization of delay slots.

What needs to be saved on the stack, and when?

Arrays on the stack, etc. When you complete a procedure, the stack pointer
should be back where it was before the call. So, you put it all together,
and you get the stack frame shown on your green card. You may have any args
above 4, you do your `jal`, `a0-3` may contain any args, `ra` has your
return address we talked about. The standard order is `a0-3`, `ra`, `s0-7`,
and local variables and `sp`, during procedure. Then you're going to do a
`jr ra` at the end, and `v0-1` contains stuff.

    void input() {
		char s[20];
		gets(s);
	}

So what's the stack going to look like? Need to save `ra`, among other
things. The input that some friendly person puts in, some string of
characters here, 7fff0028, and then some string of 20 more
characters. Suppose that's my input. What's going to end up happening? I'm
going to say jump and link to `gets`, and I'm all done, so I'm going to do
a `jr` to my return address, and I'm going to have to load it back into
`ra`. I'll fix up my stack `sp`, and then I can finally return.

Buffer overflows (7fff0028)!

Notion of stack traces.

Finally, you've got global or static or extern variables, which go into
that part of memory called static. Pretty straightforward. Something you
may not have run into is `volatile`. When might I declare something to be
`volatile`? Modification by interrupt, UART control registers, etc. Tells
compiler to check the memory-mapped value always, not just check the
register.

Lot of compilers which do the wrong things with `volatile`.

Exceptions, Interrupts, Traps
-----------------------------
Why do we need exceptions? You've got IO devices and other peripherals
which do things asynchronously with the software. When they're doing this:
keyboard, mouse, touch screen, buttons, radio(s), ethernet, SPI/I2C, ALU
can give you an overflow condition or divide-by-zero; the controller can
say bogus instruction.

A lot of things that don't fit into the natural flow of software. Popular
one: overflow. What do you do if the ALU tells you that something is bigger
than you can store? What we'll do next is learn how to write interrupt
handlers.
