Correction, Interrupts
======================
October 11, 2012
----------------
Midterm Thursday. In-class, open book, open notes, no silicon (exception:
watches) (OB/ON/NS).

The content of the midterm: all the homeworks (up to and including the one
due this Friday), all the labs, and all the labs (up to and including the
one due Friday/Monday). No homework next week, and next checkpoint is in
two weeks.

last time: we had a `jal` to a function, followed by a `nop`, and then we
moved the result of this function into `s0`. The machine is designed to
execute the branch delay instruction immediately after making the jump.

Exceptions
----------
Problem: inputs arriving synchronously with clock edges but asynchronous
with software execution. The keypress is the classic example of that.

Options: you can do blocking, polling, or interrupts. Blocking is fine for
question-answer games (like you learn when you're first doing programming);
polling is maybe useful if you're already in a tight loop. Either way, it's
extremely difficult to enforce that somebody goes back and checks quickly
enough before the data gets overwritten.

Issues: hardware calls procedure. Can happen anywhere or anytime. No args,
no return values. How to figure out what happened? How to call and return
from procedure?

When you get an exception or interrupt:

 * finish current instruction.
 * save a copy of next instruction's address
 * load address of interrupt handler into PC.
 * set some bits somewhere to indicate to tell that procedure what
   happened.
 * When done with handler, restore saved PC and return execution.

Be careful of forwarding.

There are a whole bunch of different ways that processors deal with
exception handling. Pretty much every machine has a different way of
dealing with it. A common thing to do is push the program counter, some
count of PSW (processor status word), and some set of registers onto the
stack, and to use the type of exception to determine which handler gets
called (i.e. address to load in the PC) (**vectored interrupts**).

Also common to allow higher priority interrupts to interrupt an interrupt
handler.

PSWs vary by processor, but they may say which interrupts are enabled and
what just happened. Might have a section of bits inside it that tells you
what caused the interrupt. Lots of things that can be inside of that thing.

It turns out that MIPS does none of this. MIPS does arguably a simpler
thing, so it's easier to implement. MIPS has coprocessors, which are
basically completely separate register sets that you can reference. There's
one for floating point, and there's one for processor control (CoP0). In
principle, there are 32 registers for each coprocessor. For instance, CoP0
r12 is the status register; CoP0 r13 is the cause register, CoP0 r14 is the
EPC (exception program counter).

There's only one exception handler address that ever gets invoked. For the
nominal machine, it's way up in restricted memory at 0x80000180.

CoP0, in r12 (status), bit 0 is IE (interrupt enable). If that is 0, your
processor will not be enabled. In fact, that is cleared on interrupt by the
hardware and set by the interrupt handler on exit.

In general, in MIPS, you have one interrupt handler, it runs when you get
the interrupt, and it does not let any more interrupts happen. This is
important because we have no interrupt stack.

In general, you look very carefully at the code that goes into interrupts,
because it's really bad if that stuff breaks. It's at the core of
everything that happens in the machine.

Bits 10-15 of CoP0 `r12` correspond to IM (interrupt mask). When we look at
`r13`, that corresponds to the IP (interrupt pending) area. There's also a
code in here that we won't use: if it is equal to 0, then that means you
have an interrupt.

In particular, for us, cause <15> is going to be a timer interrupt, cause
<14> is going to be a RTC (real-time clock) interrupt, and cause <10> is
going to be a UART interrupt (set by hardware when TXready goes high or
RXvalid goes high).

What about timer and RTC? Turns out you have a couple other registers in
here. `r9` ("count") is cycle count, and `r11` is the compare
register. Between them, they let you measure the execution time of
something in cycles and set a timer. The timer bit is set when `r11 ==
r9`. RTC will be high every time cycle count overflows. Fairly low-priority
interrupt. Allowed to execute roughly 4 billion instructions between ticks.

Finally, `r14` is the exception PC. These are the registers you'll have to
add to your architecture. If you choose to make an exact copy of your
32-register file, that'll be inefficient. Or you could just have 5
registers and know what their addresses are so you can mux them into the
datapath.

You'll want to generate an interrupt when `IE & IM & IP` is true.

The very first thing that happens when you start servicing an interrupt,
you'll disable the interrupt enable bit. If another interrupt happens, then
when the handler re-enables the enable bit, it'll go back and process it
again.

So we end up with two or three new instructions. If I remember correctly,
the assembler doesn't recognize one of them. For sure the ones it does
recognize are move to and from coprocessor 0, i.e. mfc0 and mtc0. The
opcode is 16 for both of these, but the `rs` value is 0 for mfc0 and 4 for
mtc0. `rt` is always the MIPS register, and `rd` is always the CoP0
register.

For instance: `mfc0 \$k0, Cause`, `mtc0 \$k1, Status`.

When you're moving to CoP0, you're going to have your two outputs. Need to
get wd for RegFile to also consider coming from CoP0.

On the MIPS, what do we do? We finish the current instruction (up to you to
determine what that means); the EPC register gets the next PC (whatever
that means to you). The PC gets `0x80000180` (on a real MIPS; we'll
probably have a different address for you), and `status<0>` gets 0.

`0x80000180` is the interrupt vector; code at the interrupt handler:

 * figure out what happened
 * deal with it
 * reset the appropriate `cause<15:10>` bit(s)
 * set `status<0>` back to 1
 * PC gets EPC (in some ISAs, that becomes `eret` (exception return).

Example interrupt handler code:

    0x80000180  mfc0 $k0, Cause
                mfc0 $k1, Status
                and  $k0, $k0, $k1    # masked, pending interrupts
				andi $k1, $k0, 0x4000 # 1 << 15
				bne  $k1, $0, Timer_ISR
				andi $k1, $k0, 0x2000 # 1 << 14
				bne  $k1, $0, RTC_ISR

Note: *all* registers other than `k0,k1` must be saved on the stack (and
restored before the interrupt handler returns) if used, since an interrupt
may happen at any point / time. Further: you may use the stack, provided
that you restore the stack pointer when you exit from the interrupt
handler.

Secondary note: *always* reserve stack space before using it, especially if
interrupts are in play.

At this point, I can do several clever things: I could use IP to determine
where to hop to, or I could go through bit by bit.

At the end of ISR, it's either `eret`, or `mfc0 \$k1, Status; ori \$k1,
\$k1, 1; mtc0 \$k1, Status; mfc0 \$k1, EPC; jr \$k1;`.
