Interrupt Service Routines
==========================
October 23, 2012
----------------

What you choose to put into HW versus ISRs is a super-important part of the
design of digital systems.

What's going on? What generates an interrupt, which is a normally-occurring
procedure call queued by some hardware change? The ones we use are overflow
of COUNT, COUNT == COMPARE (timer), and UART RXdataValid, TXReady.

Those three boxes generate interrupt requests (these are all IRQs coming
out of particular pieces of hardware on the chip), and those interrupt
requests go into the Cause register, and in particular, the timer firing
goes into bit 15, and the overflow goes into bit 14, and down here at bit
10 is where the UART lives. That whole range is the standard range for
hardware interrupts on a MIPS machine.

So that might not do anything. On the next rising edge after some event
happens, the corresponding bit should be set. Does not necessarily generate
an interrupt (for one, need to check InterruptEnable).

Note: these are simply boolean flags, so the ISR has time limits regarding
how long it has to execute.

Interrupt mask must be high for the interrupt that is pending. Bunch of and
gates lined up down here that take those bits, and if any one of those is
true, then we have a pending interrupt that is not masked.

Make sure software enables interrupts. What do you have to do? `mfc0 \$t1,
status; ori \$t1, 1;` 

I want you to contiguously count to 100M in various ways and print number
of cycles: reg, variable, addi; reg, function call; DRAM variable, addi;
DRAM variable, function, call. Finally, I want you to be able to disable
and enable the timer ISR.

Compilers don't do a very good job with function calls and volatile.

Caution is indicated for wraparound of FIFOs. Circular buffers. Fill FIFO,
then prompt UART.
