Interrupts (CP3, OS), ALU
=========================
October 25, 2012
----------------

Threads, tasks, processes, etc. Multi-tasking on a single core. Used to be
that computers only came with a single core. UNIX time-sharing system. Talk
about scheduling, renicing of processes. IO access? Via OS, generally. You
say you want to use some IO device, and you actually have to make a syscall
(a trap). Does the same thing.

Implementation of half-adders. Two half adders make a full adder (carry-in
and carry-out bits).

Simplest version of a 32-bit adder is just a 32-bit ripple-carry adder
(with a bunch of 1-bit full adders stacked on top of each other). Whatever
the time is from carry-in to carry-out on a single stage will be multiplied
by 32.

Motivation for speeding up adders. Slow; subtraction is just 2s complement
addition.

Pister's favorite: instead of making a 32-bit adder, make a 16-bit adder
with carry-in and carry-out. While this thing is calculating its sum,
calculate the sum twice: once with a carry-in of 1, once with a carry-in of
0. Then just use the carry-out from the first one and use that to select
which one we're working with. This actually takes just over half (need to
account for mux, which is fast). However: 1.5 times area + power, and 2x
input capacitance (worst-case, on the top 16 bits).

You can do this again for the 16-bit adders, and so we can get a
propagation delay of $8t_{ci/co} + 2t_{mux}$. But now I've got 2.25 times
area and power, and 4 times input capacitance.

That's carry-select. Nice and simple. There's an even simpler one that's a
fun combination called carry-bypass. The propagate signal is $a_0 \oplus
b_0$. Each one is generating its propagate signal to see if exactly one of
them is equal to 1.

All adders are used, depending on what you're optimizing for.
