Graphics acceleration and fun stuff
===================================
November 6, 2012
----------------

Project, Video, DRAM. Homework assignment not due; don't guarantee I'll do
that for the next few weeks. Like to only test students on problems that
look like homework problems they've been given. Sense of questions on final
exam.

Project: got MIPS core processor with I-cache and D-cache, and you're going
to do a graphics processor that contains (among other things) a fill block
and a line block and some other block(s). The MIPS is going to talk to that
with a simple MMIO; all of these things are going to talk to the
DRAM-request-controller/arbiter; that talks to the Xilinx memory interface
block, and that talks to your 256MB of DRAM.

The last piece is there's a pixel feeder down here that talks to the
Chrontel DVI driver, which talks ultimately to your screen and draws pretty
things on the screen. The parts you have to do primarily so far is the
graphics processor. We'll give you the DVI driver, and we've already done
most of the rest.

Inside this DRAM, obviously you've got your instruction and data memory;
you'll have two frame buffers. This pixel feeder is going to grab frame 0
or 1 (depending on which frame it is) and put it on the screen. The
interface you'll use is an 800x600 screen at 75Hz. Graphics card gets DMA;
it fetches instructions and writes data to memory.

We've got 800x600 @ 75Hz. For graphics, this is (0,0) to (799,599). We'll
have 24-bit color and store (for convenience's sake) in DRAM with X,Y
having 10-bit addresses, 1 pixel per 32-bit word.

We'll be using 8MB total for our two frames. Wasteful, but we have plenty
of RAM.

Up here, we've got 800x600 (480k pixels, even though we're allocating space
for a megapixel). If we've got 480k pixels per frame, and running at 75 Hz,
we get 36MPixel/s (144 MB/s)that has to go over the interface right
here. However: the pixel clock on the DVI driver for 800x600 @ 75Hz is 49.5
MHz. Why? Philo T. Farnsworth. Turns out that just like Farnsworth had back
in the thirties, each line has a sync pulse, front/back porch. You've got
sync, back porch video, signal (visible region), front porch, sync, and so
on. Sync is 80 pixels, front porch is 160 pixels, and back porch is 16
pixels. When you add it all up, you end up with $1056 t_{pixel}$ for the
time for a given line. And then the number of lines per frame is 600
visible, but you play the same game with lines as pixels on the line, (1
fp, 21 bp, 3 sync) so 625 lines per frame, of which only 600 are visible.

So $1056 \cdot 625 \cdot 75$ yields 49.5 megapixels per second (so
$t_{pixel}$ is about 20.2 us). The visible part of the line is only 16.6
us.

If you have to draw every frame from scratch, that means you need to erase,
then redraw.

Hardware acceleration for graphics. This is the fill engine. Line engine,
you give it a color and two endpoints. A whole bunch of simple ways to turn
endpoints into pixels. One elegant one by Bresenham, who came up with this
in the very early days of computer science: his algorithm takes (x0,y0),
(x1,y1), and if you assume it's a shallow downward slope between 0 and 45,
x0 < x1, y0 < y1, then you just calculate:

    int dx = x1-x0,
        dy = y1-y0,
        y = y0,
        error = dx/2;
    for (x = x0; x <= x1; x++) {
        plot(x,y);
		error = error - dy;
		if (error < 0) {
		    y++;
			error += dx;
		}
    }

If you do this right, you end up with a single cycle per x pixel.

Graphics processor is going to have a GP code register and GP frame
register. These two are going to live in the MMIO space of the MIPS. That's
how the MIPS talks to the processor. Software will first write graphics
instructions to DRAM, then set GP frame to point to the appropriate one of
these, and finally write GP code register with the address of the graphics
instructions. Writing that register is the trigger that'll tell your
graphics processor that it's time to execute these. Execute until it hits
done, then stop.

GP instructions are going to be 32 bits each; the first byte is going to be
type of instruction, and then there will be 0 or more arguments and 0 or
more additional words. In particular, if type is 0, this is stop; if type
is 1, this is fill (with R/G/B); if 2, this is line with R/G/B, next two
words in memory are (y0,x0) and (y1,x1) in 10-bit values. Those are the
three you need to implement, and you've got to come up with one more
instruction to do something interesting.

Generalized memcpy; you've got an array of bitmaps, copy a character. If
you really want to be fancy, the shaded triangle.

Move on to talk about what's going on inside this DRAM box.

DRAM
----

What was the first company to sell MOS DRAMs? Intel, 1970, i1101 and very
soon thereafter the i1103. 1Kb DRAM, 500 ns cycle time (asynchronous), sold
for 10 dollars, which was huge: less than 1 cent per bit for the first time
in the industry.

Architecture on this thing was a capacitor for storage, a word line going
across, and a bit line going down (for writes). Funky voltages, by the way
(asymmetric). Did not have good enough electronics to read out, so they
actually did a 3T memory on that and put the access transistor with a
separate bit line for reads. That's where we started, and pretty quickly,
that got onto Moore's law curves. There was a time when this was the single
most popular chip for a couple of years, and they started making these
microprocessors.

So we have these asynchronous circuits -- no clock on them -- they got big
pretty quickly. They didn't want all the pins going in. Parallel 2-bit,
enough room in the 20-pin package. They hit a megabit on chip pretty
quickly, and they didn't want that many address lines, so they had shared
address lines between row and column, which meant that they needed latch
signals to lock those into the row and column, so there was the row address
strobe (they called them strobes because when it flashes, that's when you
grab the value) and the column address strobe.

This is basically an edge-triggered signal, and to this day people use that
word. This is RAS and CAS. So you've got a big cell array which has a bunch
of word lines coming out of it, so we've got a row register with a clock
input on it, inverted to RAS, and a column register inverted going to
CAS. The inputs are n bits of address, D and Q, and that goes into a big
DMUX, where you've got $2^n$ word lines, which goes into your cell array,
and coming out of your cell array you have $2^m$ bit lines, where $m \le
n$.

The first thing this needs to hit are the sense amps and column
drivers. What's inside today is just a single transistor and capacitor;
we've got a word line and a bit line; transistor is just a tiny capacitor
with maybe only a thousand electrons on it, compared to capacitor (hence
the sense amps); this then goes into the row register, which has a bunch of
control lines on it and a clock. If we're reading, at least conceptually,
we've got a big DMUX here, and we're taking that signal and taking those
$2^n$ bits and turning it into a single output bit from the array.

And the logic on that (see handout) involves RAS, CAS, WE, and OE. This
destroys contents of the row that you're reading.
