Project - cost model
====================
November 13, 2012
----------------

Technology node, defined in terms of gate length of a MOS transistor;
ancient technology that's been around for a long long time is 0.18
micron. The mask cost for 0.18, let's call it 200 grand (depends on which
foundry you go to). Then there's how much SRAM you get in bits per square
millimeter, how much DRAM or flash or ROM you have.

Call it 100 kb/mm$^2$ of SRAM and 1Mb/mm$^2$ for DRAM, and 50k useful logic
gates per square millimeter.

Technologies scale roughly with the square root of 2 with every
generation. We could replicate this table, and a reasonable approximation
is that all of these things scale with the technology node. Let's just
approximate as linear. In particular, the mask cost is going up at least
linearly. It'll probably be fine. The theoretical numbers get better as the
square of the scaling (quoted), but the practical numbers rarely do.

The kirf of a diamond saw, somewhere around 25 micron. But if I blow up that die,
I've got a kirf on each side, I've also got pads on all sides in a pad
ring. This is where you make a wire bond -- you put this chip down on some
sort of package with a lead frame with some metal that comes out and wraps
around, and you glue it down. You've got to have a machine that comes down
and makes a wire bond from the top to the chip, etc. So you've got to have
these pads to get your signal in and out; the pad spacing is on the order
of 100 micron, but the area you have to devote is more like 200
microns. How would this chip get made? What are the inputs?

Don't need to talk about floor planning, but that is something that would
be in a real discussion.

HBM: Human body model: 10k resistor, however many pF capacitor, and some
voltage across the capacitor that's voltage of the human. ESD --
electrostatic discharge.

Probe card -- forest of tiny pins that drop down onto the surface of the
chip; controlled, so all of these guys can be grounded when they touch
down; driven by appropriate voltage. You can sprinkle test pads all over
inside.

Another thing: it's very common that this die has very different
technology.

Less interested that you use the right scaling so much as you knowing that
there is scaling.

So let's talk about SDRAM again.

You've got a DMA controller that you're interfacing with that interfaces
with your SDRAM chip. Interfaces with your devices and a bunch of FIFOs.

Note regarding masks: ones correspond to what you don't write.

For writes, this is a ready-valid interface on both of these. The ready is
the nor of the two fifo-fulls (`af` and `wdf`), and valid is just the
`af_wr_en` signal, and you have to double-pump the data. Give same address
twice (not sure, but would not mess with this). Hold these values for two
cycles when ready and valid.

When you write a single pixel to memory, it's going to go right through and
find the right address and put the data in there. There will only be 4
zeros in the two sets of 16. For reads, same thing -- your ready is
`~af_fifo_full`; I don't think that the read fifo needs to tell you that
its queue is full. There's something on the other side that inverts these
things when talking to the SDRAM, but you don't have to worry about these
things.

secondary notes: we put x after y because we draw row by row. 31 bits that
look something like `{5'b0, 6'bfb, 10'by, 7'bx, 3'b0}`.

On your chips, each bank is 16kb wide.

Row-column delay: time between when I present the address, it goes through,
and gets latched at the row register. At that time, I can give a column
address, take those things from the row, and stick that into what we're
calling a burst register.

Come down now on your chips to four columns of 16 bits each.

Either send the data out, or I've got it coming back in. Those are wired up
to the D-Q pins (either inputs or outputs; point is that data can flow in
either direction depending on whether I'm doing a read or a write out of
this thing). $t_{CAS}$ or $CL$; $t_{CAS}$ is actually $CL * t_{clk}$.

Delays: $CL*t_{clk} - t_{RCD} - t_{RD} - t_{RAS}$.

If I'm in active state in the right row, your SDRAM is 3-3-3-8, but your
verilog implementation is 5-3-3-8. For whatever reason, what's actually
implemented is a CAS latency of 5.

Time to go from idle to read to idle.
