Delay and Power
===============
November 29, 2012
-----------------

Office hours next week: TuTh 10-11, F 3-4; Finals week not 100% sure, but I
think it'll be TuTh afternoon. Won't be around on Friday until the exam;
will post on Piazza what they end up being.

Projects still due tomorrow; 3 PM: Verilog. Hopefully should not be much
software to write at this point.

Final is still Friday of finals week. Will be comprehensive. Will post a
couple of examples of questions on SDRAM and maybe delay + power. Really
good things to ask the TAs about; maybe will come up with solutions as
well.

Delay and Power
---------------

Last time: the two key equations were $\tau = RC \approx $ delay per stage
or gate. Lots of ways to look at this, but gets you into the right
ballpark. Nitty gritty details: 141. $C = C_{wire} + C_{gate}$. .2fF/um,
1fF/um*W. If building dense stuff, gate dominates, but anything over "wide
area" is dominated by wire capacitance.

And two, the power that gets dissipated is $P = NCV^2 f_{0 \to 1}$. If all
transistors switch every nanosecond, you dissipate easily a kW of power,
and the chip melts. Fortunately, most gates aren't switching.

If we draw our FF, we have a storage cell with an enable line on it being
fed by something with an enable line on it. If you recall, we've got CLK
and !CLK; you've got your input D on there. As soon as CLK goes high, you
start feeding that value back to itself, and you turn off the input.

Register file: 32x32 in your regfile; you do have a handful of address
lines going into this thing, but at most a tenth are going to be
accessed. One to be written, two to be read out.

Could figure out power consumption from this formula. What's going on
inside the array? On average sixteen bits out of the 1024 in this array;
that's not where the power is. But you've got the clock going between four
different gates, and if you go back to your notes, that's two PMOSes and
two NMOSes; clock to clock-bar, and there's your A and A-bar.

This clock line coming in has to drive a bunch of inverter-equivalent
gates; it's the clock tree that burns the power more so than the reading
and writing of these feedback networks.

SRAM cell is also cross-coupled inverters, and some access lines -- you've
got a word line running across the top, and vertically you've got bit-line
and bit-line-bar coming down through the array. These lines in general, one
line not going to be active, but you'll have to switch the capacitance of
the bit-lines. Doesn't matter what the bit is; you'll be charging one or
the other of the two capacitances. Turns out that's not generally the
problem with the SRAM; the biggest problem is leakage. Will talk about that
in a minute.

So that's where our power is coming from. Where our delay is coming from --
a common thing people will do to test process is put a ring oscillator test
structure: you put some odd prime (need prime to avoid harmonics) number of
inverters; they'll make that structure of ring oscillators, put it in a box
with a power supply, measure current going through, and put a counter on
the outside; and that might be for example a 12-bit counter, and they have
a ripple-carry-out coming out of the test structure; they then see how fast
this ring oscillator will go.

If you go on the web to MOSIS, you can take your design from CS150 and send
it off to them, and for \$2000, they'll send you back some chips. In
principle, they'll do what they did on your FPGA. Collect designs from lots
of groups; share costs of mask process. Tons of process information.

One example: 32nm CMOS, 0.9V, 11-stage ring oscillator, $f_{osc} = 9.3
GHz$, $P = 110 uW$. What is $\tau, C, R$?

Every gate switches at $f_{osc}$. If we think about the delay for a gate in
an $N$-stage ring oscillator, how many gate delays fit into the time
constant? $T_{osc} = 2Nt_d; t_d \approx \tau = t_{osc}/2N$. MOSIS might do
fanout of 4; that'll be something you hear very often. You might see
something like a ring oscillator where each inverter drives 3 dummy
inverters as well as the one actually in use.

$110uW = 11 C_{gate} * (0.9V)^2 * f_{osc}$. Note: usually $f_{0\to 1}
\ll f_{clk}$; 

$C_{gate} \approx 10 uW / (10 V^2 GHz) = 1fF$; $R = \tau / C = 5
k\Omega$. Just from looking at the power consumption and oscillation
frequency, you can figure out $\tau, R, C$.

Dynamic power: $CV^2 f$. Leakage power is the problem, often. Gate oxide
leakage, like to thin oxide layer, but thinner oxide increases likeliness
of tunneling. Probability cloud. EOT; equivalent oxide thickness. Higher
k-value; looks like silicon dioxide with less thickness (to get the
electric field needed), but you don't get as much tunneling.

Leakage path through this thing. Still current that flows through. Plot
drain current vs gate-source voltage on a log-log plot, etc. You want to
maximize $I_{on} / I_{off}$ (roughly switching speed vs leakage). Turns out
there are fundamental limits on this slope here. You can't get that to be
less than 60 mV at room temperature. And you need a lot of orders of
magnitude. You really like this to be a big number; one way to do that is
to just use a bigger supply voltage: increase $V_{DD}$. But power goes as
$V_{DD}^2$. Further, materials tend to break down at high voltages (per
distance).

MEMS transistors. You can make a relay which in cross-section has a
subsection which is insulated and an electrode; a polysilicon beam that
goes over this thing. By putting a voltage, you use electrostatic
attraction and make / break connections. Now you do have something that
looks like a switch; you don't have any leakage that way. You still have
surface leakage, though.

Return to lecture 1, where we talked about what digital system design is
these days. At the core is microprocessor and what runs on that; then
you've got inputs. Outputs like audio, video, LEDs, communication and
networking (wifi, USB, ethernet, cellular bands, ...), memory and other
storage (flash / ROM, SRAM, DRAM); a bunch of accelerators (graphics,
crypto, floating point and math, DSP broadly).

What you have done: doing your Verilog and synthing that to an FPGA is most
certainly what you do in industry. Finally, you tape out. Make masks, which
cost an enormous amount of money, you make wafers and chips and boards,
which go through testing. 2 to 24 months. 6-8 might be more typical. Many
millions of dollars today.
