CS 150: Digital Design & Computer Architecture
==============================================
August 28, 2012
---------------

Admin
-----

Lab: cardkey, working on that. Not a problem yet. Labs: T 5:30-8:30, W 5-8,
θ 5-8. Discussion section: looking for a room. Office hours online. &theta;
11-12, F 10:30-11:30. In 512 Cory.

Reading: Ch. 4 (HDL). This week: through 4.3 (section that talks about
structural Verilog). For next week: the rest. It is Verilog only; we're not
going to need VHDL. If you get an interview question in VHDL, answer it in
Verilog.

Taxonomy
--------
you've got HDLs, and there are really two flavors: VHDL and
Verilog. Inside of Verilog you've got structural (from gates) and
behavioral (say output is equal to a & b).

Abstraction
-----------
Real signals are continuous in time and magnitude. Before you do anything
with signals, these days, you'll discretize in time and magnitude --
generally close enough to continuous for practical purposes. If it's a
serial line, there's some dividing line in the middle, and the HW has to
make a decision. Regular time interval called CLK; two values of
magnitude is called binary.

Hierarchy
---------
Compose bigger blocks from smaller blocks. Principle of reuse -- modularity
based on abstraction is how we get things done (Liskov). Reuse tested
modules. Very important design habit to get into. Both partners work on and
define interface specification. Layering. Expose inputs and outputs and
behavior. Define spec, then divide labor.

One partner implements module, one partner implements test harness.

Regularity: because transistors are cheap, and design time is expensive,
sometimes you build smaller (simpler) blocks out of tested bigger
blocks. Key pieces of what we want to do with our digital abstraction.

Abstraction is not reality. Simulation: Intel FDIV bug in the original
Pentium. Voltage sag because of relatively high wire resistance.

Lab 0: our abstraction is structural Verilog. There are tons of online
tutorials on Verilog; Ch 4.3 in H\&H is a good reference on that; your TAs
are a good reference. Pister's not a good reference on the syntax. You're
allowed to drop a small number of different components on your circuit
board and wire them up. If you want to make some circuit, you can.

Powers of two!

FDIV bug: from EE dept at UCLA: outraged that they had not done exhaustive
testing.

note: $1 yr \approx \pi \cdot 10^7 s$. With this approximation, $\pi$ and
$2$ are about the same. Combinatorial problem.

Combinational logic vs. sequential logic. Combinational logic: outputs are
a function of current inputs, potentially after some delay (memoryless),
versus sequential, where output can be a function of previous inputs.

Combinational circuits have no loops (no feedback), whereas circuits with
memory have feedback. Classic: SR latch (2 xor gates hooked to each other).

So let's look at the high-level top-down big picture that we drew before:
system design comes from a combination of datapath and control (FSM). On
the midterm (or every midterm Pister's given for this course), there's
going to be a problem about SRAM, and you're going to have to design a
simple system with that SRAM.

e.g. Given 64k x 16 SRAM design, design a HW solution to find the min and
max two's complement numbers in that SRAM.

Things you need to know about transistors for this class: you already know
them.

Wired OR (could be a wired AND, depending on how you look at it). Open
drain or open collector: this sort of thing.

Zero static power: CMOS inverter. Not longer true; power going down, but
number goes up. Leakage current ends up being on the order of an amp. Also,
increasingly, gates leak.

switching current: charging and discharging capacitors. $\alpha C V%2 f$

crowbar current: $I_{CC}$, While voltage is swinging from min to max or
vice versa, this current exists. All of these things come together to limit
performance of microprocessor.

a minterm is a product containing every input variable or its complement,
and a maxterm is a sum containing every input variable or its complement.
