CS 150: Digital Design & Computer Architecture
==============================================
August 30, 2012
---------------

Introduction
------------
Finite state machines, namely in Verilog. If we have time, canonical forms
and more going from transistor to inverter to flip-flop.

So. The idea with lab1 is that you're going to be making a digital
lock. The real idea is that you're going to be learning behavioral Verilog.

Finite State Machines
---------------------

Finite state machines are sequential circuits (as opposed to combinational
circuits), so they may depend on previous inputs. What we're interested in
are synchronous (clocked) sequential circuits. In a synchronous circuit,
the additional restriction is that you only care about in/out values on the
(almost always) positive-going edge of the clock.

Drawing with a caret on it refers to a circuit sensitive on a positive
clock edge. A bubble corresponds to the negative edge.

If we have a clock, some input D, and output Q, we have our standard
positive edge-triggered D flip-flop. The way we draw an unknown value, we
draw both values.

A register is one or more D flip-flops with a shared clock.

Blocking vs. unblocking assignments.

So. We have three parts to a Moore machine. State, Output logic, and next
state. Mealy machine is not very different.

Canonical forms
---------------

Minterms and maxterms. Truth table is the most obvious way of writing down
a canonical form. And then there's minterm expansion and maxterm
expansion. Both are popular and useful for different reasons. A minterm is
a product term containing every input variable, while a maxterm is a sum
term containing every input variable. Consider min term as a way of
specifying the ones in the truth table. Construction looks like disjunctive
normal form.

Maxterms are just the opposite: you're trying to knock out rows of the
truth table. If you've got some function that's mostly ones, you have to
write a bunch of minterms to get it, as opposed to a handful of
maxterms. Construction looks like conjunctive normal form.

Both maxterm and minterm are unique.

de Morgan's law: "bubble-pushing".
