CS 150: Digital Design & Computer Architecture
==============================================
September 4, 2012
-----------------

FSM design: Problem statement, block diagram (inputs and outputs), state
transition diagram (bubbles and arcs), state assignment, state transition
function, output function.

Classic example: string recognizer. Output a 1 every time you see a one
followed by two zeroes on the input.

When talking about systems, there's typically datapath and the FSM
controller, and you've got stuff going between the two (and outside world
interacts with the control).

Just go through the steps.

Low-level stuff
---------------

Transistor turns into inverter, which turns into inverter with enable,
which turns into D flip-flop.

Last time: standard CMOS inverter. If you want to put an enable on it,
several ways to do that: stick it into an NMOS transistor, e.g. When enable
is low, output is Z (high impedance) -- it's not trying to drag output
anywhere.

It turns out (beyond scope of things for this class) that NMOS are good at
pulling things down, but not so much at pulling things up. Turns out you
really want to add a PMOS transistor to pull up. We want this transistor to
be on when enable is 1, but it turns on when the gate is low. So we stick
an inverter on enable. Common; called a pass-gate (butterfly gate). Pass
gates are useful, but they're not actually driving anything. They just
allow current to flow through. If you put too many in series, though,
things slow down.

Pass-gates as controlled inverters; can be used to create a mux.

SR (set/reset) latch. Requires a NOR gate. Useful thing about NOR and NAND
is that with the right constant, they can make inverters. That is why they
are useful in making latches (if we cross-couple two of them).

If S = R = 0, then NOR gates turn into inverters, and this thing
effectively turns into a bistable storage element. If I feed in a 1, it'll
force the output to be 0, which forces the original gate's input to be a 1.

Clock systems. Suppose we take our SR latch and put an AND gate in front of
S and R with an enable line on it, we can now turn off this functionality,
and when enable is low, S and R can do whatever they want; they're not
going to affect the outputs of this thing. You can design synchronous
digital systems using simple level sensitive latches.

Contrast with ring oscillator (3-stage; simplest). That is unstable -- if I
put an odd number of inverters in series, there is no stable
configuration. Very useful for generating a clock. Standard crystal
oscillator: Pierce configuration.

Odd number of stages unstable, two stages stable, more stages you have to
wrry about other things.

Can be clocked, but you have to be careful. For example: if I wanted to
design a 1-bit counter, with a clocked system, we can consider a
level-sensitive D latch. This is what happens when you get a latch in
Verilog. Otherwise, the synthesis tool well have it keep its previous
value. If you do that, it turns out that probably gives you enough delay
that when the clock is high, the output is 1; it'll probably oscillate. So
that's bad; maybe we'll make the enable line (the clock line) really
narrow. And not surprisingly, that's called narrow clocking. For simple
systems, you can get away with that. Make delay similar to single gate's or
a few gates' delay. However, ugly, and don't do that. Back in the day,
people did this, and they were simple enough that they could get away with
it.

What I really want is my state register and its output going through some
combinational logic block with some input to set my next state, and only
once per clock period does this thing happen. The problem here is in a
single clock period, I get a couple of iterations through the loop. So how
do I take my level-sensitive latch (I've turned it into a D latch with
enable, and that's my clock), and when clock is low, there's no problem. I
don't worry that my input's going to cruise through this thing; and when
it's high, I want my input (the D input) to remain constant.

As long as clock is high, I don't care; it'll maintain its state, since I'm
not looking at those inputs. There are a whole bunch of ways you can do it
(all of which get used somewhere), but the safest (and probably most
common) is to stick another latch (another clocked level-sensitive latch)
in front of it with an inverter. That's now my input.

So when the clock is low, the first one is enabled, and it's transparent
(it's a buffer). This is called an edge-triggered master/slave D flip-flop.

The modern way of implementing the basic D latch is by using feedback for
the storage element, and an input (both the feedback and the input are
driven by out-of-phase enable). My front end (the master) is driving the
signal line when the clock is low, and, conversely, when the clock is high,
the feedback inverter will be driving the line. Bistable storage element
maintaining its state, and input is disconnected.

Now, with the slave, same picture. Sensitive when clock is high, as opposed
to master, which is sensitive when clock is low. The idea is that the slave
prevents anything from getting into the storage element until it
stabilizes.

At the end of the day, the rising edge of the clock latched D to
Q. Variation that happened after, doesn't propagate to master; variation
that happened before, slave wasn't listening. So now we have flip-flops and
can make FSMs.
