CS 150: Digital Design & Computer Architecture
==============================================
September 6, 2012
-----------------

Verilog synthesis vs. testbenches (H&H 4.8)
-------------------------------------------

There's the subset of the language that's actually synthesizable, and then
there's more stuff just for the purpose of simulation and testing. Way
easier to debug via simulation.

Constructs that don't synthesize:
* #t: used for adding a simulation delay.
* ===, !==: 4 state comparisons (0, 1, X, Z).
* System tasks (e.g. \$display, prints to console in a C printf-style
  format that's pretty easy to figure out; \$monitor, prints to console
  whenever its arguments change)

In industry, it's not at all uncommon to write the spec, write the
testbench, then implement the module. Once the testbench is written, it
becomes the real spec. "You no longer have bugs in your code; you only have
bugs in your specification."

How do we build a clock in Verilog?

    parameter halfT = 5;
	reg CLK;
	initial CLK = 0;
	always begin
		#(halfT) CLK = ~CLK;
	end

H&H example 4.39 shows you how to read from a file.

	silly_function(.a(a), .b(b), .c(c), .s(s));
	
	reg [3:0] testvect[10000:0];
	$readmemb("test.tv", testvect); // done when input is 4 bits of X (don't care)
	
	always @(posedge CLK)
		#1 assign {a, b, c, out_exp} = testvect[num]
	
	always @(negedge CLK) begin
		if (s !== out_exp) $display("error ... ");
		num <= num + 1;
	end

How big can you make shift registers? At some point, IBM decreed that every
register on every IBM chip would be part of one gigantic shift register. So
you've got your register file feeding your ALU; it's a 32 x 32
register. There's a test signal; when it's high, the entire thing becomes
one shift register. Why? Testing. This became the basis of JTAG. Another
thing: dynamic fault imaging. Take a chip and run it inside a scanning
electron microscope. Detects backscatter from electrons. Turns out that a
metal absorbs depending on what voltage they're at, and oxides absorb
depending on the voltage of the metal beneath them. So you get a different
intensity depending on the voltage.


We can also take these passgates and make variable interconnects. So if
I've got two wires that don't touch, I can put a passgate on there and call
that the connect input.

Last time we talked about MUXes. I can make a configurable MUX -- the MUX,
we did a two-to-one mux, and if I've got some input over here, I select
according to what I have as my select input.

Next time: more MIPS, memory.
