CS 150: Digital Design & Computer Architecture
==============================================
September 11, 2012
------------------

Changed office hours this week. CLBs, SAR, K-maps.

Last time: we went from transistors to inverters with enable to D-flipflops
to a shift register with some inputs and outputs, and, from there to the
idea that once you have that shift register, then you can hook that up with
an n-input mux and make an arbitrary function of n variables.

This gives me configurable logic and configurable interconnects, and
naturally I take the shift out of one and into another, and I've got an
FPGA.

The LUT is the basic building block: I get four of those per slice, and
some other stuff: includes fast ripple carry logic for adders, the ability
to take two 6s and put them together to form a 7-LUT. So: pretty flexible,
fair amount of logic, and that's a slice. One CLB is equal to two slices.

And I've got, what is that, 8640 CLBs per chip. Also: DSP48 blocks. 64 of
these, and each one is a little 48-bit configurable ALU. So that gives you
something like 70000 (6-LUTs + D-ff). So that's what you've got, what we
work with.

Now, let's talk about a successive approximation register analog to digital
converter. A very popular device. Link to a chip that implemented the
digital piece of this thirty years ago. Why are we looking at this? It's
nice; it's an example of a "mixed-signal" (i.e. analog mixed with digital
in the same block, where you have a good amount of both) system.

It turns out that analog designers need to be good digital designers these
days. I was doing some consulting for a company recently. They had
brilliant analog designers, but they had to do some digital blocks on their
chips.

"Real world" interfaces. Has some number of output bits that go into the
DAC; the DAC's output is simply "linear". You trust the analog designer to
give you this piece, and the digital comparator sample and hold circuit,
with the sample input, and here's your analog input voltage. So real quick
we'll look at what's in those blocks (even though this isn't 150
material). S/H: simplest example is just a transistor. Maybe it's a
butterfly gate; typically, there's some storage capacitor on the outside so
that if you've got your input voltage; when it goes low, that is held on
there.

Maybe there's some buffer amplifier (little CMOS opamp so it can drive nice
loads); capacitive input, so signal will stay there for a long time. Not
150 material.

The DAC, a simple way of making this is to generate a reference voltage
(diode-connected PMOS with voltage division, say). which you mirror, tied
together with a switch, and all of these share the same gate. Comparator's
a little more subtle. Maybe when we talk about SRAMs and DRAMs.

Anyway. So. Now we have the ability to generate an analog voltage under
digital control. We sample that input and are going to use that
signal. This tells us whether the output of the DAC is too big. That
together is called a SAR.

So what does that thing do? There's a very simple (dumb) SAR: a
counter. From reset in time, its digital output increases linearly; at some
point it crosses the analog $V_{in}$, and at that point, you stop. But:
that's not such a great thing to do: between 1 and 1024 cycles to get the
result. The better way is to do a binary search. Fun to do with
dictionaries and kids. Also works here. FSM: go bit-by-bit, starting with
most significant bit.

Better solution (instead of using oversized tree -- better in the sense of
less logic required): use a shift register (and compute all bits
sequentially). Or counter going into a decoder; sixteen outputs of which I
only need 10.

Next piece: another common challenge and where a lot of mistakes get made:
analog stuff does not simulate as well. While you're developing and
debugging, you have to come up with some way of simulating.

Good news: you can often go in and fix things like that. Sort of an aside
(although it sometimes shows up in my exams), once you put these
transistors down, and then you've got all these layers of metal on
top. Turns out that you can actually put this thing in a scanning electron
microscope and use undedicated logic and go in with a FIB (focused ion
beam) and fix problems. "Metal spin".

Back to chapter two: basic gates again. de Morgan's law: $\bar{AB} =
\bar{A} + \bar{B}$: $\bar{\prod{A_i}} = \sum \bar{A_i}$. Similarly,
$\bar{\sum{A_i}} = \prod \bar{A_i}$. Suppose you have a two-level NAND/NAND
gate: that becomes a sum of products (SoP). Similarly, NOR/NOR is
equivalent to a product of sums (PoS).

Now, if I do NOR/NOR/INV, this is a sum of products, but the inputs are
inverted. This is an important one. This particular one is useful because
of the way you can design logic. The way we used to design logic a few
decades ago (and the way we might go back in the future) was with big long
strings of NOR gates.

So if I go back to our picture of a common source amplifier (erm,
inverter), and we stick a bunch of other transistors in parallel, then we
have a NOR gate. Remember: MOS devices have parasitic capacitance.

Consider another configuration. Suppose we invert our initial input and
connect to both of these a circled wire, which can be any of the following:
fuse / anti-fuse, mask-programmable (when you make the mask, decision to
add a contact), transistor with flipflop (part of shift register, e.g.), an
extra gate (double-gate transistors).

So now if I chain a bunch more of these together (all NOR'd together, then
I can program many functions. In particular, it could just be an inverter.

I can put a bunch of these together, and I can combine the function outputs
with another set of NORs, invert it all at the end, and I end up with
NOR/NOR/INV.

These guys are called PLAs (programmable logic arrays), and you can still
buy them, and they're still useful. Not uncommon to have a couple of
flipflops on them. Will have a homework assignment where you use a 30 cent
PLA and design something. Quick and dirty way of getting something for
cheap.

Not done anymore because slow (huge capacitances), but may come back
because of carbon nanotubes. Javey managed to make a nanotube transistor
with a source, drain, gate, and he got transport, highest current density
per square micron cross-section ever, and showed physics all worked, and
this thing is 1nm around. What Prof. Ali Javey's doing now is working with
nanowires and showing that you can grow these things on a roller and roll
them onto a surface (like a plastic surface), and putting down layers of
nanowires in alternating directions.

You can imagine (we're a ways away from this) where you get a transistor at
each of these locations, and you've got some CMOS on this side generating
signals, and CMOS on the output taking the output (made with big fat
gigantic 14nm transistors), and you can put $10^5$ transistors per square
micron (not pushing it, since density can get up to $10^6$). End of road
for CMOS doesn't mean you ditch CMOS. Imagine making this into a jungle
gym; then you're talking about $10^8$ carbon nanotubes per cubic micron,
etc. The fact that we can make these long thin transistors on their lengths
means that this might come back into fashion.
