CS 150: Digital Design & Computer Architecture
===============================================
September 13, 2012
------------------

Questions of the form 16x16 SRAM, design a circuit that will find the
smallest positive integer or biggest even number, or count number of times
17 appears in memory, etc. Kris loves these questions where you figure out
design (remember: separate datapath and control, come up with it on your
own) -- will probably show up on both midterm and final.

Office hours moved.

So... last time, we were talking about PLAs (prog logic array) and stuff
(NOR/NOR equivalent to AND/OR). You'll hear people talking about AND plane
and OR plane, even though they're both NORs. If you look at Fig 2.2.3,
they'll show the same regular and inverted signals, and they just draw this
as a line with an AND gate at the end. Pretty common way to draw this;
lines with OR gates.

Variant of PLA called a PAL -- subsets of "product" terms going to "OR"
gates.

Beginning of complex programmable logic devices (CPLDs, FPGAS). You can
still buy these registered PALs.

Why would you use this over a microprocessor? Faster. Niche. The "oh crap"
moment when you finish your board and you find that you left something
out.

I want to say a little about memory, because you'll be using block ram in
your lab next week. There's a ton of different variations of memory, but
they all have a couple of things in common: a decoder (address decoder)
where you take $n$ input bits and turn them into $2^n$ word lines in a
memory that has $2^n$ words. Also have cell array. Going through cell array
you have some number of bit lines, we'll call this either $k$ or $2k$,
depending on the memory. That goes into some amps / drivers, and then out
the other side you have $k$ inputs and/or outputs. Sometimes shared
(depends whether or not there's output-enable). Write-enable,
output-enable, sometimes clock, sometimes d-in as well as d-out, sometimes
multiple d-outs (multiple address data pairs); whole bunch of variation in
how this happens. Conceptually, though all comes down to something that
looks like this.

So what's that decoder look like? Decoders are very popular circuits: they
generate all minterms of their input (gigantic products). Note that if you
invert all of the outputs, we get the maxterms (sums).

That was DRAM. Now, SRAM:

Still have word line going across; now I have a bit line and negated bit
line. Inside, I have two cross-coupled inverters (bistable storage
element). Four transistors in there: already down (vs. 1), and I still have
to access. Access transistor going to each side, hooked up to the word
line. When I read this thing, I put in an n-bit address, and the
transistors pull the bit lines. We want these as small as possible for the
bit density. 6T, sense amp needed. You can imagine that what you usually do
is pre-charge $BL$, $\bar{BL}$. As soon as you raise the word line for this
particular row, what you find is that one of them starts discharging, and
the other is constant. Analog sensing present so you can make a decision
much much faster.

That's how reads work; writes are interesting. Suppose I have some
$D_{in}$, what do I do? I could put an output-enable so that when writing,
they don't send anything to the output, but that would increase size
significantly. So what do I do? I just make big burly inverters and drive
the lines. Big transistors down there overcome small transistors up there;
and they flip the bit. PMOS is also generally weaker than NMOS, etc. Just
overpower it. One of rare times that you have PMOS pulling up and NMOS
pulling down. (notion of "bigger": $W/L$).

Transistors leak. They can leak a substantial amount. By lowering voltage,
I reduce power. It turns out there's a nonlinear relationship here, and so
the transistors leak a lot less.

So that's SRAM. The other question? What about a register? What's the
difference between this and a register file? Comes back to what's in the
cell array. We talked that a register is a bunch of flipflops with a shared
clock and maybe a shared enable. Think of a register as having the common
word line, and you've got a D flipflop in there. There's some clock shared
across the entire array, and there's an enable on it and possibly an
output, depending on what kind of system you've got set up. We've got D-in,
D-out, and if I'm selecting this thing, presumably I want output-enable; if
I'm writing, I need to enable write-enable.

So. You clearly have the ability to make registers on chips, so you can
clearly do this on the FPGA. Turns out there's some SRAMs on there,
too. There's an external SRAM that we may end up using for the class
project, and there's a whole bunch of DDR DRAM on there as well.

Canonical forms
---------------
Truth tables, minterm / maxterm expansions. These we've seen.

If you have a function equal to the sum of minterms 1,3,5,6,7, we could
implement this with fewer gates by using the maxterm expansion.

"Minimum sum of products", "minimum product of sums".

Karnaugh Maps
-------------

Easy way to reduce to minimum sum of products or minimum product of
sums. (Section 2.7). Based on the combining theorem, which says that $XA +
X\bar{A} = X$. Ideally: every row should just have a single value
changing. So, I use Gray codes. (e.g. 00, 01, 11, 10). Graphical
representation!
