CS 150: Digital Design & Computer Architecture
==============================================
September 18, 2012
------------------

Lab this week you are learning about chipscope. Chipscope is kinda like
what it sounds: allows you to monitor things happening in the FPGA. One of
the interesting things about Chipscope is that it's a FSM monitoring stuff
in your FPGA, it also gets compiled down, and it changes the location of
everything that goes into your chip. It can actually make your bug go away
(e.g. timing bugs).

So. Counters. How do counters work? If I've got a 4-bit counter and I'm
counting from 0, what's going on here?

D-ff with an inverter and enable line? This is a T-ff (toggle
flipflop). That'll get me my first bit, but my second bit is slower. $Q_1$
wants to toggle only when $Q_0$ is 1. With subsequent bits, they want to
toggle when all lower bits are 1.

Counter with en: enable is tied to the toggle of the first bit. Counter
with ld: four input bits, four output bits. Clock. Load. Then we're going
to want to do a counter with ld, en, rst. Put in logic, etc.

Quite common: ripple carry out (RCO), where we AND $Q[3:0]$ and feed this
into the enable of $T_4$.

Ring counter (shift register with one hot out), If reset is low I just
shift this thing around and make a circular shift register. If high, I clear
the out bit.

Mobius counter: just a ring counter with a feedback inverter in it. Just
going to take whatever state in there, and after n clock ticks, it inverts
itself. So you have $n$ flipflops, and you get $2n$ states.

And then you've got LFSRs (linear feedback shift registers). Given N
flipflops, we know that a straight up or down counter will give us $2^N$
states. Turns out that an LFSR give syou almost that (not 0). So why do
that instead of an up-counter? This can give you a PRNG. Fun times with
Galois fields.

Various uses, seeds, high enough periods (Mersenne twisters are higher).

RAM
---
Remember, decoder, cell array, $2^n$ rows, $2^n$ word lines, some number of
bit lines coming out of that cell array for I/O with output-enable and
write-enable.

When output-enable is low, D goes to high-Z. At some point, some external
device starts driving some Din (not from memory). Then I can apply a write
pulse (write strobe), which causes our data to be written into the memory
at this address location. Whatever was driving it releases, so it goes back
to high-impedance, and if we turn output-enable again, we'll see "Din" from
the cell array.

During the write pulse, we need Din stable and address stable. We have a
pulse because we don't want to break things. Bad things happen.

Notice: no clock anywhere. Your FPGA (in particular, the block ram on the
ML505) is a little different in that it has registered input (addr &
data). First off, very configurable. All sorts of ways you can set this up,
etc. Addr in particular goes into a register and comes out of there, and
then goes into a decoder before it goes into the cell array, and what comes
out of that cell array is a little bit different also in that there's a
data-in line that goes into a register and some data-out as well that's
separate and can be configured in a whole bunch of different ways so that
you can do a bunch of different things.

The important thing is that you can apply your address to those inputs, and
it doesn't show up until the rising edge of the clock. There's the option
of having either registered or non-registered output (non-registered for
this lab).

So now we've got an ALU and RAM. And so we can build some simple
datapaths. For sure you're going to see on the final (and most likely the
midterm) problems like "given a 16-bit ALU and a 1024x16 sync SRAM, design
a system to find the largest unsigned int in the SRAM."

Demonstration of clock cycles, etc. So what's our FSM look like? Either
LOAD or HOLD.

On homework, did not say sync SRAM. Will probably change.
