EE 120: Signals and Systems
===========================
January 17, 2012.
-----------------
* BABAK
* email: AYAZIFAR@EECS.BERKELEY.EDU
  + Best way to contact.
	- If time-sensitive, make subject line explosive. Literally.
	- Does his best to respond. So that's that.
* Office: 517 Cory

Grading:
--------
* Three midterms.
  + MT1: 20%. Date: Feb 14. Week of drop date (almost certainly)
  + MT2: 25%. Date: TBA. Percentage tentative (alt. 20%)
  + MT3: 25%. Date: Last lecture.
* Homework: 15%, drop lowest two scores.
  + 4-6 homeworks.
  + Work in groups of 3-5 people.
  + Each member of group turns in separate document.
	- Must constitute primarily own work.
	- Write own name at top, names of collaborators beneath.
  + Tentatively due Tuesdays so Babak can have OH on Monday evenings.
* Pop quizzes (often obvious when): 15%. Drop lowest one.
* Possible research paper project. 10% => MT2, MT3 weigh 20% each.
  + Just get feet wet with journals.
  + Same for everybody.

Since the course is not HW-heavy, there are weeks we don't have
homework. So get together with groups and plow through old exams.

The other thing you can do is look at a couple of books. Most of them
are with this title: Signals & Systems. One of them is by Oppenheim,
Willsky, Nawab. This one's an expensive book, actually. Don't
recommend you go out and buy it unless you can find one printed
overseas. Excellent problems -- mostly MIT exams. Taught out of this
book previously. (both are second-edition)

There's another one with the same title by Hwei P. Hsu (Schaum's
Outline) -- great for self-study because every problem is solved.

Basic Properties of Systems
===========================
* Linearity
  + $x\to[F]\to y$
  
	if:

	$x_1\to[F]\to y_1$
	$x_2\to[F]\to y_2$

	then:

	$\alpha x_1\to[F]\to\alpha y_1$   (scaling / homogeneity property)
	$x_1+x_2\to[F]\to y_1+y_2$ (additivity property)
	  
	if:

	($\forall x_1,x_2\in X, \alpha_1 x_1\to\alpha_2x_2\to[F]
	\to\alpha_1 y_1+\alpha_2y_2$),

	then:

	($\forall x_1,x_2\in X, \alpha_1 x_1+\alpha_2x_2\to[F]
	\to\alpha_1y_1+\alpha_2y_2$),
		
	(where:

	  $x \in X$    input signal space
	  
	  $y \in Y$    output signal space
	  
	  $y = F(x)$
	  
	  $y(t)$     output at time t
	  
	  $y(n)$     output of sample n)
	  
  + example: resistor and stuff. Ohm's law. $\vec{J} = \sigma \vec{E}$ and
	whatnot.
	- By changing the system into a time-variant system, it doesn't
	  lose linearity.
	- ZIZO.
	  - converse not true.
	  - contrapositive/logical equiv: $\not \text{ZIZO} \implies \not
        \text{L}$.
* Modulation
  + Parallel interconnection of linear systems produces a
	multiple-input linear system.
	- Strictly speaking, this is a lie. It's not really parallel.
  + Two-point moving average:
	- Scaling and additivity properties.
* Time Invariance
  + $\hat{x}(t) = x(t-T) \implies \hat{y}(t) = y(t-T)$
	$\forall x\in X, \forall T \in \mathbb{R}$

	Hidden assumption: X is closed under shifts. (i.e. $x\in X \implies
	\hat{x}\in X$)
  + occurs, e.g. when something that isn't an input is time-dependent.
* Causality
  + Basically, no dependence on future values.
	- If two inputs are identical to some point, then their outputs
	  must also be identical to that same point.

