EE 120: Signals and Systems
===========================
February 21, 2012.
-----------------

Circular convolution wrap-up
============================

$h(n) = \frac{B}{\pi n} \sin(An) \fourier H(\omega) = u(n+A)-u(n-A)$.
(ideal low-pass filter and its impulse response)

What if I had a filter whose frequency response G(\omega) is basically the
signal (circularly) convolved with itself (with some extra factors)?
description: ramp going from 0 to $4AB^2$ from $-2A$ to $0$, then back down
to $0$.

* Recall: To perform circular convolution:
  + Keep one function fixed (in terms of a dummy frequency variable)
  + Keep only one period of the other signal.
  + Perform regular convolution.

* Example: $(Q * R)(\omega)$.
+ Plot on a dummy-variable axis $Q(\lambda)$ with its replicas.
  + Plot R only in one period (zero out all replicas).
  + Flip \& slide $R$. $R(\lambda-\omega)$

What's the brute-force way to find the impulse response? Synthesis
equation.

Inspection method? It looks like it's $2\pi h^2(n) = \frac{2B^2}{\pi
n^2}\sin^2(An)$ (circular convolution must yield the $2\pi$ scalar)

* Recall: $q(n)r(n) \fourier 2\pi (Q*R)(\omega)$.

* _Note: this filter is BIBO stable, and its Fourier transform is
  continuous._

Now, we can spend a lot of time on the various properties of the DTFT (what
happens when you time-reverse a signal, shift, multiplication properties,
modulation, etc.), and this'll probably show up in a problem set.

As the last example on the DTFT: $f(n) = e^{i\omega_0n}h(n)$. Let one of
these be a sinusoid. What do you do?

It's effectively shifted by $\omega_0$, after the math clears.

Intermission
============
Tentative midterm date: March 13.

Continuous-Time Fourier Transform
=================================

$X(\omega)$: roughly the frequency response in continuous-time.

$$X(\omega) = \infint x(t)e^{-i\omega t}dt
\\ x(t) = \frac{1}{2\pi} \int X(\omega)e^{i\omega t}d\omega$$$

Slight shorthand: $X = \infint x(\tau)\phi{\tau} d\tau (\phi{t}(\omega)
\defequals e^{-i\omega \tau})$

To determine $x(t)$: (assume for now that $\braket{\phi_t}{\phi_\tau} =
\delta{\tau t})$

$\braket{X}{\phi_t} \defequals \infint X(\omega) \phi_t^*(\omega) d\omega$.

$\braket{X}{\phi_t} = \int X\braket{\phi_\tau}{\phi_\tau}d\tau$

_NB: Inner products are in frequency domain._

* Recall:
  + In the discrete-time case, we found that for $\braket{\phi_m}{\phi_n}$,
	we got $2\pi\delta_{mn}$. Turns out, we have exactly the same
	relationship in the continuous-time case.
  + In the continuous-time case, we have $2\pi\delta(m-n)$.

* Recall Poisson's identity: $\sum \delta(t-\ell p) = \frac{1}{p}\sum
  \exp(ik\omega_0t)$.

Now we are desperate to have $\infint e^{i\omega t}d\omega =
2\pi\delta(t)$. Which means we must have $\delta(t) \equiv \frac{1}{2\pi}
\int e^{i\omega t}d\omega$. New definition for $\delta(x)$.

Mutual orthogonality of the CTFT takes on this nasty form.

Plausibility argument:
----------------------

The right-hand side is proportional to $\int e^{i\omega t}d\omega = \int
\cos(\omega t)d\omega + i\int \sin(\omega t)d\omega$. Imaginary part is
guaranteed to be 0. By the same argument, the cosine portion is 0 if $t
\neq 0$. Otherwise, we're integrating 1 over all reals, so we have
$\infty$.

Constructively interfere at $t = 0$, but destructively interfere at $t \neq
0$.

Therefore the right-hand side must be proportional to $\delta(t)$.

The claim is that the constant of proportionality is $2\pi$. The hard part is
to recognize this is actually a Dirac delta.

Intermission
============
Steam coming out of our heads, evidently. Remember, this is the only
barrier to studying the DTFT.

One way to show $\delta(t) \equiv \frac{1}{2\pi} \int e^{i\omega t}d\omega$
==============================================================

This method you will see, hear, etc. in engineering contexts for figuring
out something that doesn't converge, since Riemann integrals don't really
work here.

$\delta_\Delta(t) = \frac{1}{2\pi} \int e^{i\omega t}e^{-\Delta\abs{\omega}}$. This
product is supposed to tame the function such that it is now integrable.

(take $\Delta > 0$)

Multiply what you've got with something that makes the product
converge. Then take the limit as said function goes to 1?

In other words, I am perturbing the problem slightly to make it stable and
taking the limit as stability goes to 0.

NB: half-width, half-maximum: where we're at half the width of our function
and also half the maximum value.

Perturbation theory!

$\alpha \defequals $ perturbation parameter. Chosen such that area is 1.

Result of the integral: $\delta_\Delta(t) = \frac{\alpha\Delta}{\pi}
\frac{1}{\Delta^2 + t^2}$. Turns out $\alpha=1$.

This is a Cauchy probability density function.

(names for dirac delta: generalized function, distribution. Look up theory
 of distributions)

