EE 120: Signals and Systems
===========================
February 23, 2012.
-----------------
$\newcommand{\fourier}{\overset{\mathcal{F}}{\Longleftrightarrow}}$

Continuous-time Fourier transform

Recall:
$$X(\omega) = \int_{-\infty}^\infty x(t)e^{-i\omega t}dt
\\ x(t) = \frac{1}{2\pi}\int_{-\infty}^\infty x(t)e^{i\omega t}dt$$

We developed the inverse Fourier transform using a bizarre identity for
which we established a way to derive (i.e. perturbation theory).

Example: Ideal low-pass filter. In the continuous-time story, you do not
assume any periodicity. Figure out the impulse response of this filter.

$$\frac{1}{2\pi}\int_{-A}^A Be^{i\omega t} = \frac{B}{\pi t}\sin(At)$$ (valid
for $t = 0$ as well)

Okay. Now, how would you plot this? maximum of $\frac{AB}{\pi}$, zeroes at
$\frac{k\pi}{A} \forall k \in \mathbb{Z}$.

$$H(\omega) = \int h(t) e^{-i\omega t}dt\bigg|_{\omega=0} = \int h(t)dt =
H(0) = B$$.

Largest triangle has the same area as the integral over all space.

Another question. Let $B=1$. What is $\lim_{A\to\infty} h(t)$? Yet another
Dirac delta (yet another Dirac delta definition).

Take $g(t)$ as a block. What is $G(t)$? It is a sinc function.

If you dilate in the time domain, you squish the frequency domain, and vice
versa.
$$
\delta(t) \fourier 1
\\ 1 \fourier 2\pi\delta(\omega)
\\ e^{i\omega_0t} \fourier 2\pi\delta(\omega-\omega_0)
\\ \cos(\omega_0t) \fourier \pi(\delta(\omega-\omega_0) + \delta(\omega+\omega_0))
\\ \sin(\omega_0t) \fourier i\pi(\delta(\omega+\omega_0) - \delta(\omega-\omega_0))
\\ x(t) \fourier X(\omega)
\\ x(t-T) \fourier e^{-i\omega T}X(\omega)
\\ e^{i\omega_0t}x(t) \fourier X(\omega - \omega_0)
$$

Multiplication in Time
----------------------

$$h(t) = f(t)g(t) \fourier H(\omega)
\\ f(t) \fourier F(\omega)
\\ g(t) \fourier G(\omega)$$

Since transforms are not periodic, we have a regular convolution with an
extra $1/2\pi$ term. $H(\omega) = \frac{1}{2\pi}(F * G)(\omega)$.

Reasoning for convolution leading to multiplication in frequency domain:
cascade two systems, choose input to be complex exponential. This is an
eigenfunction, so we have the output response being $F(\omega)G(\omega)$. Now
choose input to be an impulse. Output is $(f*g)(t)$.

INTERMISSION
------------

Amplitude modulation
--------------------

I'm going to start what looks like a new phase of this course, but it's
hardly anything new and unpredictable. If you understand the CTFT and its
fundamental properties (what we've talked about so far), you should have no
problem understanding amplitude modulation.

One of the things you've experienced by now is that the atmosphere is quite
unforgiving to audible frequencies. Your voice only transmits over some
short distance.

Obvious solution is to shift spectrum to a much higher frequency range. The
way we do it is to multiply by either a complex exponential or a
sine/cosine (called a carrier signal). Carries signal of interest. So
$Y(\omega) = \frac{1}{2\pi}(X * C)(\omega) = X(\omega - \omega_0)$. What
happens is that $\omega_0$ is usually large enough to make transmission
through the atmosphere possible.

Ignoring all degradation going through the atmosphere, to retrieve the
original signal, multiply by the negative carrier frequency (complex
exponential). Frequencies about zero: baseband frequencies. Shifted
spectrum of received signal back to baseband.

aliasing; completely garbles signal.

Apply low-pass filter at end to capture baseband spectrum. Scale by two to
recover original signal, complete with amplitude.

Final observations: we first of all made an assumption that the received
signal is the same as the transmitted signal. Whole area of communication
theory that deals with deterioration. Other assumption is that the
oscillator at the receiver that can generate the exact same frequency as
the transmitter oscillator and at the same phase.
