EE 120: Signals and Systems
===========================
February 28, 2012.
-----------------
AM Continued
============

(review of what we just did)

Recall:
-------
There are two major assumptions that we made. First of all, no
transmission degradation. Second of all, the receiver has the exact
same phase and frequency as the transmitter.

Question:
---------
What if $\hat{c}(t) = \cos(\omega_0t + \theta)$? (still keeping the
assumption that we can somehow match the frequency. New assumption: phase
is constant and not time-varying)

Thoughts:
---------

If the phase is off by $\pi/2$, then you lose your signal entirely. $r(t) =
\frac{1}{2}\cos(\theta)x(t) + \frac{1}{2} x(t)\cos(2\omega_0t +
\theta)$. If $\theta$ is relatively small (compared to $\pi/2$), then we
are safe, since we have our original signal. However, we lose our signal
as $\cos\theta\to0$.

Note:
MT2 date: Tues, 13 Mar 2012.

Also: when $\theta=0$, this is referred to synchronous demodulation
(transmitter and receiver in sync)

Instead of sending $y(t)$ into a low-pass filter, what we do is send it
through the diode parallel RC circuit. This is one way to do asynchronous
demodulation. This is technically cheating, since we assume that our signal
is entirely positive. However, we can simply apply a DC offset if we know
the bounds on our values.

Suppose $|x(t)| \le A \forall t$. Then, transmit $\hat{x}(t) \equiv x(t) +
A$.

Why is this method of transmitting $\hat{x}(t)$ called AM with large
carrier? We're actually also transmitting the carrier: $\hat{x}(t)
\cos(\omega_0 t) = x(t)\cos(\omega_0 t) =A\cos(\omega_0 t)$.

If $\abs{x(t)} \le K$, we want $K < A$. In fact, $\frac{K}{A}$ is referred
to as the percent modulation or modulation index.

One thing you should know is that there is redundancy in information double
side-band suppressed carrier.

Frequency Division Multiplexing
===============================

Each player is allocated a piece of real estate along the frequency axis.

Quadrature multiplexing
-----------------------

The way we can do this is by exploiting the orthogonality of cosine and
sine. What's being transmitted is the sum of the two.
