EE 120: Signals and Systems
===========================
March 8, 2012.
--------------
Spoke about sampling, impulse train, conditions under which signal can be
recovered -- if band-limited, and frequency high enough, we can recover
with a low-pass filter.

We drew the spectrum, and we showed that if we sampled fast enough, we
could recover the original signal.

What I want to do now is talk about what is going on in the time domain. I
am sending the nonuniform impulse train into some low-pass filter, and I
want to see what $r(t)$ is. So the first thing I want you to do is tell me
what the impulse response of this filter is. $h(t) = \sinc\parens{ \frac{
\omega_s t}{2}}$.

When you convolve the sinc with these impulses, what do you get? Notice the
alignment. Since $x_q(t) = \sum x_c(nT_s)\delta(t-nT_s)$, $r(t) = \sum x_c
(nT_s) h(t-nT_s)$. So let's draw this. (basic premise: interpolation;
further from center means impulse has weaker effect. Also, zero crossings
occur at locations of all other impulses. Scaling is strength of impulse.)
We're only going to get one signal. Only one will be obtained from this
interpolation scheme.

Remember, $\sinc \alpha = \frac{\sin \pi \alpha}{\pi\alpha}$.

Thus the expression for $x_q(t)$ can be rewritten as $\sum x_c (nT_s)
\sinc(\frac{\omega_s(t-nT_s)}{2\pi})$. This is a loaded
expression. Remember how when we started Fourier series, how we expand a
signal in terms of orthogonal basis functions? This is an orthogonal
expansion. The values of the signals at the sample points; these shifted
sincs are the orthogonal functions.

Now, if you look at your problem set, there are a couple of problems you
ought to pay attention to. One: Fourier transform preserves orthogonality,
i.e. if two signals are mutually orthogonal in the time domain, they're
mutually orthogonal in the frequency domain. You use that later to show
that these shifted sincs are orthogonal: you do not show this in the time
domain. That's where you use orthogonality-preserving property of the
continuous-time Fourier transform.

What does this mean? A band-limited signal $x$ has an orthogonal expansion
in terms of shifted sincs. These are not arbitrary sincs: $T_s$, the
sampling period, enters this expression. It's very related to the bandwidth
of the original signal. Yet another context in which orthogonal expansions
show up.

You can essentially consider $h_0(t)$ as the unshifted $\sinc (\frac
{\omega_s t}{2\pi}) = h(t)$. $h_n(t) = h_0(t - nT_s)$. These functions, we
claim, are mutually orthogonal. Namely, $\braket{h_k}{h_l} =
\delta_{kl}$. Here, you use Parseval's theorem, since you do not want to
integrate $\sinc^2$. Called band-limited interpolation, since you do not
get the original signal if either it wasn't band-limited, or you didn't
sample fast enough (which is where aliasing occurs).

Another view of sampling as an orthogonal expansion:
----------------------------------------------------
Another way to look at this is to start in the frequency domain, where I
have my spectrum of my signal. If you remember, Fourier series expansion is
not just useful for representing periodic signals, but also for
finite-duration functions (in this case, it's finite in frequency). You can
think of these phantom replications of this triangle. In other words, I can
create a periodic extension of this triangle, which is my $X_c(\omega)$, if
I create this periodic extension in such a way that these triangles touch
exactly.

I can write $X_c(\omega) \equiv \sum_{k\in \mathbb{Z}} X_k e^{ikT_s
\omega}$. We refer to $T_0 = 2\pi/2A$ as our fundamental "frequency" of the
periodic extension of $X_c(\omega)$. (this has units of seconds, in
fact). This expression is only valid for the range $\abs{\omega} \le A$. It
is zero outside of said range.

You can do this for any finite-duration function, since this can be thought
of as one period of a periodic signal.

What I'm going to do is go back to the time-domain function using the CTFT
inverse formula. I'm looking at a band-limited function, so the integral
doesn't actually go from $-\infty$ to $\infty$, but rather from $-A$ to
$A$. And in this range, you know that $X_c$ is equal to the Fourier series
expansion. So, exchanging the integral and the summation (as we do so very
often), and evaluating the integral, we get a linear combination of sinc
functions.

It turns out these coefficients are the values of the signal at the sampled
points. That isn't obvious yet. After some algebraic manipulations, we can
finally see that this whole thing is just $x_c(kT_s)$.
