EE 120: Signals and Systems
===========================
March 15, 2012.
--------------
More on the $\mathcal{Z}$-transform
===================================

$$
h(n) \ztrans \hat{H}(z) = \infsum{n} h(n) z^{-n}
\\ R_h = \text{region of convergence}
\\ \defequals \set{z \in \cplx \middle| \sum_n \abs{h(n) z^{-n}} < \infty}
$$

For signals of finite duration, the region of convergence is the entire
complex plane, minus possibly $r=0$ and $r=\infty$.

Example which was causal, $x(n) = \alpha^n u(n)$. $\hat{X}(z) = \frac{1}{1
- \alpha z^{-1}}$, $\abs{\alpha} < \abs{z}$ (i.e. outside the circle).

We also had an anticausal example, $q(n) = -\alpha^n u(-n-1)$. $\hat{Q}(z)
= \frac{1}{1 - \alpha z^{-1}}$, $\abs{z} < \abs{\alpha}$ (i.e. inside the
circle).

Furthermore, we discussed that a Fourier transform existed if and only if
the unit circle was contained in the region of convergence.

Notice that the RoC of a causal system was outside, all the way to
infinity, while the RoC of an anticausal was inside, all the way to zero.

We further learned that causal signals are a subset of right-sided signals,
and anti-causal signals are a subset of left-handed signals.

So what happens if we shift our signal, i.e. $r(n) = x(n+1)$?

$\hat{R}(z) = z\hat{X}(\omega)$. This is a simple example of what we call
the time-shift property. You can guess what happens when we shift by an
arbitrary integer. $x(n-N) \ztrans z^N X(z)$. Note that this is no longer
causal, but it is still right-sided.

Notice that now the signal blows up at infinity, so our radius of
convergence is now $R_r: \abs{\alpha} < \abs{z} < \infty$. The set of
right-sided signals is a strict superset of the set of causal signals.

This is the difference between the z-transform of right-sided signals and
that of causal signals.

Similarly, with a left-sided signal, we would exclude the origin from the
RoC.

There's also a simple way of showing why causal signals are outside of some
radius of convergence.

Let x be causal. Its z-transform starts from the earliest possible point,
i.e. $n = 0$. $\hat{X}(z) = x(0) + \frac{x(1)}{z} + ... $.

If $\abs{z} = R_1 \in R_x$, I want you to argue why $\abs{z} = R_2$, where
$R_1 < R_2$ is also in the RoC. Reasoning: with larger radii, we have
smaller values in our absolute sum.

Right-sided signals: almost identical, except we have a finite number of
elements on the left, and so infinity must be excluded.

Once you find the radius at which the sum converges, everything else
outside also converges.

Similar argument for anti-causal and left-sided signals.

So now let's combine these.

Example:
--------
$g(n) = \parens{\frac{1}{2}}^n u(n) - \parens{\frac{3}{2}}^n u(-n-1)$

As done before, we have $\frac{1}{1 - \alpha z^{-1}}$ for both values of
"$\alpha$". Thus our region of convergence is $\frac{1}{2} < \abs{r} <
\frac{3}{2}$ (superposition tells us the corresponding z-transform is
$\frac{2z}{2z - 1} + \frac{2z}{2z - 3} = \frac{2z(z-1)}{(z-\frac{1}{2})
(z-\frac{3}{2})}$).

As you can see, two-sided signals have annular regions for their RoCs.

Reason for zeroes: if I were to ask you to find the inverse of the system,
what would you do? Let's say this represents distortion, and you want to
undo the distortion.

Also comes into play when you want to plot the frequency response.

Let's do another

Example:
--------

$h(n) = \expfrac{3}{2}{n}u(n) - \expfrac{1}{2}{n} u(n-1)$. Now we've got
**nothing** -- there is no overlap between the two regions, so there is
neither a Z-transform nor a region of convergence. (we would have the same
expression, but this doesn't hold anywhere.)

Intermission
------------

Time Shift Property
===================
$x(n-N) \to z^{-N}\hat{X}(z)$. What does this do to the region of
convergence? It can potentially eliminate infinity (if N positive) or zero
(if N negative), but not both.

Convolution Property
====================
If you have $h \equiv f \star g \ztrans \hat{H}(z) =
\hat{F}(z)\hat{G}(z)$. Simple way to show this is by cascading filters and
feeding in (instead of a complex exponential) $z^n$ -- this is identical to
the eigenfunction property of LTI systems. And what's the RoC? $R_h \supset
(R_f \cap R_g)$ (could be bigger if pole-zero cancellation occurs)

Think of these poles as dam (damn?) walls.

If we put this system in cascade with another one such that $q(n) =
\delta(n) - \frac{1}{2}\delta(n-1)$, $\hat{Q}(z) = \frac{z-\frac{1}{2}}
{z}$. Since this is a FIR filter, $R_q = \cplx - \set{0}$.

$\hat{A}(z) = \hat{R}(z)\hat{Q}(z) = \frac{2(z-1)}{z - \frac{3}{2}}$ . We
get double pole-cancellation, in fact, so $R_q = \set{z \middle| \abs{z} <
\frac{3}{2}}$.

Time-reversal
=============
$x(n) \ztrans \hat{X}(z)$. $x(-n) \ztrans ?$ Do a variable substitution,
and then you see that everywhere you had $z$, it's now a $z^{-1}$. Thus
$x(-n) \ztrans \hat{X}(\frac{1}{z})$. When you correlate this with the
Fourier-transform story, we got a frequency reversal in the frequency
domain. Locations of poles and zeroes map to their inverses,
i.e. $\hat{X}(z_0) \to \hat{X}^\prime(\frac{1}{z_0})$.

Multiplication by a complex exponential
=======================================

Presume
$$
g(n) \ztrans \hat{G}(z)
\\ h(n) = z_0^n g(n) \ztrans \hat{H}(z) = ?
$$

$\hat{G}(\frac{z}{z_0})$, after the dust clears. If $p_0$ is a pole of
$\hat{G}$, it moves to $z_0p_0$.

Z-transform of the unit step? $\frac{1}{1 - z^{-1}}$, where $1 <
\abs{z}$. This is a perfect example of why the z-transform is not a strict
superset of the Fourier transform -- that only happens when the unit circle
is strictly part of the RoC. Otherwise you can't evaluate the expression
there.

Z-transform of the tone burst (suddenly-applied cosine wave)? We've done
this (albeit in parts).

Note that radius of convergence isn't changing.

Will leave it to you to figure out what the transform of $r^n \cos(\omega_0
n) u(n)$ is.
