EE 120: Signals and Systems
===========================
April 2, 2012.
--------------

We finished talking about the relationship between LCCDEs and
Z-transforms. A little later -- either next lecture or next week -- we're
going to talk about how to solve Z-transforms this way. Convenience:
convolutions turn into multiplications (which are almost always easier to
do than convolutions). Z-transforms turn difference equations into
algebraic expressions.

Properties:

Initial Value Theorem
=====================
If you have a causal discrete-time signal x (which means $x(n) = 0, n <
0$), and suppose I'm looking at its Z-transform. $X(z) = \sum_{n=0}^\infty
x(n)z^{-n} = x(0) + \frac{x(1)}{z} + \frac{x(2)}{z^2} +
...$. $\lim_{z\to\infty} \hat{X}(z) = x(0)$, ergo the name initial-value
theorem. Simple to prove; sometimes helpful when you have a rational
function or some other signal which you happen to know is causal. You can
also massage this expression to get the other values.

Obv. does not work for FT: in that case, $z$ always on unit circle.

Dancing around inverse Z-transforms: $x(n) = \frac{1}{2\pi i} \oint
\hat{X}(z) z^{n-1} dz$ (contour integral). We are not going to use this
(i.e. forget about it).

The ways we invert:
===================

* Inspection

If I ask you what the inverse transform is of $\frac{1}{1 - \alpha
z^{-1}}$, we know the result, depending on whether $\abs{\alpha}$ is
greater or smaller than $\abs{z}$.

Now consider $\hat{X}(z) = \frac{1}{3}z - \frac{1}{2} + 2z^{-1}$. We can
decompose this FIR into its contributing values.

* Power Series Method

We can use the equivalent power series and just transform it term by term.
(we could also get some of these via time-reversal and inspection).

* Long Division

Recall rational transforms correspond to functions that have difference
equations.

Suppose $\hat{G}(z) = \frac{z}{z-1}$. Doing the long division the usual way
(i.e. by $z-1$) will yield the causal signal $u(n)$. Doing long division a
different way (i.e. by $1-z$) will yield the anticausal signal $-u(-n-1)$.

The point is that you have flexibility with respect to how you do the long
divison, and each of them will give you a different corresponding one-sided
signal.

Recall: a signal cannot be causal if its transfer function
diverges. However, the number of samples to the left corresponds to the
order of growth of the transfer function (as a polynomial).

Rational Transform Pole-Zero Book-keeping
=========================================
Suppose I have a transfer function $\hat{H}(z) = \frac{A(z)}{B(z)}$, where
$A$ is $m^{th}$ order, and $B$ is $n^{th}$ order. If $M < N$, H is strictly
proper. If $M \le N$, H is proper. ANd if $M > N$, H is improper.

For $M < N$, there are $N$ finite poles (counting multiplicities), $M$
finite zeros, and $N-M$ zeros at infinity.

For $M = N$, there are $M = N$ finite poles, $M = N$ finite zeros. No
activity at infinity.

For $M > N$, there are $M$ finite zeros, $N$ finite poles. and $M-N$ poles
at infinity.

In any of these cases, the number of poles equals the number of zeros. The
difference is always what is happening at infinity.

Back to power series
====================
$\hat{F}(z) = e^{\frac{1}{z}}$. Just use the Taylor series for the
exponential function. Falls into place.

Partial Fraction Expansion
==========================
Again we are speaking of a rational Z-transform. You've studied partial
fractions in calculus. It's no different here, really. However, this
partial fraction must be proper. If not, just do long division until it's
in that form.

Case I: Simple Poles
--------------------
Best case is when all finite poles are simple (i.e. order 1).

(remember: causal signal means that the RoC must be outside the outermost
pole.)

So what happens if I ignore the causality constraint and instead add the
constraint that the signal is BIBO stable? We get a different equation,
which is now a two-sided signal, and nothing blows up.
