EE 120: Signals and Systems
===========================
January 19, 2012.
-----------------

More on causality
-----------------
(proof by contradiction of previous example)

(input zero up to a certain point, but the output is nonzero before said
point. output preceding input. In itself, it does not tell non-causality,
but if you know the system is either linear or time-invariant, then you
know it can't be causal.)

L and C implies not P

If the system is linear AND causal, output cannot precede the input.

contrapositive: P implies not (L and C) = not L or not C.

for time invariance, we don't have to insist that the input is zero up to a
point; it just has to be (any) constant. Output also doesn't have to be
zero; it just has to be constant (not necessarily the same constant,
obviously).

(TI and C) implies not P
contrapositive: P implies not TI or not C.

anti-causality is defined as the exact opposite of causality. Everything
we've said about causality, the inequalities change sign.

Bounded-input bounded-output (BIBO) stability.
----------------------------------------------

if $\abs{x(n)} \le Bx (\exists Bx < \infty) \implies \exists 0 < By <
\infty \text{ s.t. } \abs{y(n)} \le By \forall n$

every FIR (finite-duration impulse response filter) is BIBO stable.

LTI (linear time-invariant) systems
-----------------------------------

$x(n)$ can in general be decomposed into into a linear combination of
impulses. (Kr\"onecker deltas). $x(n) = \sum_{m=-\infty}^\infty
x(m)\delta(n-m)$. (sifting property)

If you know the response of the LTI system to the unit impulse, you know
the response to all discrete-time inputs -- decompose it into unit
impulses.

convolution sum.
$$
x(n) = \sum_m x(m) \delta(n-m)
\\ y(n) = \sum_m x(m)f(n-m)
\\ y(n) = (x * f)(n)
\\ y(n) = \sum_m^\infty x(m)f(n-m) = \sum_{k=-\infty}^\infty f(k)x(n-k)
\\ = (f*k)(n)
\\ \therefore x * f = f * x
$$.

You can reverse the roles of the impulse response and the input signal.

Let $x(n) = e^{i\omega n}$. $y(n) = F(\omega) = (\sum_k f(k)e^{-i\omega
k})e^{i\omega n}$.  Frequency response of this LTI system.

Converges nicely iff the system is BIBO-stable. The frequency response of
the system will be a very smooth function of omega.

BIBO stability for LTI systems
------------------------------

An LTI system F is BIBO stable iff its impulse response converges
(absolutely summable in discrete case or integrable in continuous case).

IF the impulse response is absolutely summable, then F is BIBO stable
(every bounded input produces a bounded output).

$$y(n) = \sum_k f(k)x(n-k) \text{ (I/O relation for an LTI system)}.
\\ \abs{y(n)} = \abs{\sum_k f(k)x(n-k)} \le \sum_k \abs{f(k)}\abs{x(n-k)}
\\ \abs{x(n)} \le Bx \forall n.           \le (\sum_k \abs{f(k)})Bx$$

F is BIBO stable $\implies \sum_n \abs{f(n)} < \infty$

contrapositive. i.e. we can find at least one bounded input that produces
an unbounded output.

(fudge something to cancel out signs; we create our absolute sum over all
integers @ n=0. convolve signal with time-reversed signal;
auto-correlation. convolution of a signal with itself.)

$\frac{f(n)^2}{\abs{f(n)}} = \abs{f(n)}^2/\abs{f(n)} = \abs{f(n)}$

IIR Filters
-----------
$y(n) = \alpha y(n-1) + x(n)$.  causal, $y(-1) = 0$.

(geometric sum; BIBO stability depends on magnitude of \alpha being less
than
1.)

