EE 120: Signals and Systems
===========================
April 5, 2012.
--------------
Partial Fraction Expansions (Cont'd)
====================================

The case of multiple poles:
---------------------------
Example: $\hat{G}(z) = \frac{z^2}{\parens{z-\frac{1}{2}}^2(z-2)}$.

Remember, double-pole at $\frac{1}{2}$ (for this, we can do the
double-cross), and a pole at 2. How many possible regions of convergence
can we have? 3.

Now let's try to find the impulse response. Before you can do that, you
need to break this rational transfer function into a combination of first
and second-order terms. We're not going to carry this all the way to the
impulse response, but we are going to break it up.

Any time you have a multiple pole, you have to write the expansion in terms
of the first order term plus the second order term (or $Az + B$ in the
numerator).

The trick at the end is to differentiate and evaluate at the multiple pole.

Assume causal system. Determine $g(n)$. Linear combination of the inverse
Z-transforms, since this is a linear operator. Differentiation property to
derive inverse transform of second term.

Transient, steady-state systems
===============================

Steady-State and Transient Decomposition of DT-LTI System Responses
-------------------------------------------------------------------

We're going to talk in this course about two ways of decomposing the
responses of DT systems. One of these is decomposing into transient (which
dies out in the long term) and steady-state (long-term dominant)
components.

Starting with a causal system. First-order IIR filter, single pole at the
origin. Since $\alpha$ is inside the unit circle, this system is BIBO
stable.

Simple question: here's your system h, it's got some impulse response, I
apply a step function to it.

Once again, remember that partial fraction expansion _requires_ that you
have a strictly proper fraction. You may need to pull out some of your
zeros to make the fraction strictly proper (or do long division).

The end result is the transform $y(n) = \frac{1}{1-\alpha} u(n) -
\frac{\alpha}{1 - \alpha} \alpha^n u(n)$. The first term is our
steady-state response. It does not go away with time. The second term is
the transient response. It 

Thus we can decompose any signal into a transient portion and a
steady-state portion.

**If a system is BIBO-stable _and_ causal, all of its poles are inside the
unit circle.**

Question: a BIBO-stable and causal DT-LTI system has all its poles inside
the unit circle. Why is that?

The RoC must be outside of the outermost pole (result of causality). It is
also BIBO stable, so it must include the unit circle. Thus the outermost
pole must be inside the unit circle, so all other poles must also be inside
the unit circle.

Transient is any part that dies out at infinity, while steady-state is
anything that is either steady or growing. Notions of dominance (separate
but connected closely to transient/steady-state analysis). Dominance is
tied to the long-term behavior (i.e. which term dominates when $n$ large?)

Back to the original setup: $x(n) = u(n) \implies y(n) = \frac{\alpha}
{\alpha-1} \alpha^n u(n) + \frac{1}{1-\alpha} u(n)$. What if $x(n) = 1$
(for all time)?

Since this system has settled, we have just the steady-state component.

We want to get to the continuous-time story. What if the input signal is a
constant signal 1? We get as output our steady-state result. What this
means is that the system is unable to distinguish between the constant
signal 1 and the unit step which kicks in at $n=0$ if you wait long
enough.

All this talk about complex exponentials was really just a discussion
regarding steady-state. Non-stable pole (always one on the unit circle),
which is going to dominate the response.

Now that you have this connection, you don't have to solve for the
coefficient (if the system is BIBO-stable). All you have to do is figure
out the transient portion.

Deferring ZIZO until next week.

Example
-------
Consider the causal system described by $y(n) = \frac{5}{6}y(n-1) -
\frac{1}{6} y(n-2) + x(n)$. Determine the unit step response of the system.

Transform everything. Remember that $\hat{H}(z) = \frac{\hat{Y}}{\hat{X}}$.

(linear algebra approach:

Looks like $\lambda^n$.

Thus $Y^n = \frac{5}{6}Y^{n-1} - \frac{1}{6}Y^{n-2}$.

$$
y^2 = \frac{5}{6}y - \frac{1}{6}y
\\ y^2 - \frac{5}{6}y + \frac{1}{6}y = 0
\\ y = -\frac{1}{2}, -\frac{1}{3}
$$

These are our eigenvalues. Some linear combination of these two
exponentials will give us our initial conditions (i.e. $y(0) = 1$, $y(-1) =
y(-2) = 0$). That is, $y = a_0 \parens{-\frac{1}{2}}^n + a_1 \parens{-\frac{1}{3}}^n$
)
