EE 120: Signals and Systems
===========================
April 17, 2012.
---------------

Differentiation property:
-------------------------
$$
x(t) \ltrans \hat{X}(s)
\\ \dot{x}(t) \ltrans s\hat{X}(s)
$$

LCCDEs

$y^{(N)} + ... + a_1 y^{(1)}(t) + a_0 = b_M x^{(M)} + ... + b_0 x(t)$. What
I want you is to apply the differentiation property to find the transfer
function of this. (x-coefficients-polynomial divided by
y-coefficients-polynomial)

$\frac{\sum_m b_m s^m}{\sum_n a_n s^n}$.

Going back to a series-RC circuit powered by a voltage source, we have
$z(t) = \frac{x(t) - y(t)}{R}$, $C\dot{y}(t) = z(t)$. So $C\dot{y} -
\frac{1}{R}y(t) = x(t)$. Transfer function therefore is $\frac{1}{RCs +
1}$. Other way is to plug in $e^{-st}$ and insist silly things.

Inverting this signal yields $\frac{1}{RC}e^{-t/(RC)}u(t)$. That is the
impulse response of the system.

So that was differentiation in time. There is differentiation in the
s-domain. 

Differentiation in s
--------------------
$$
x(t) \ltrans \hat{X}(s)
\\ -t x \ltrans \deriv{\hat{X}}{s}
$$

$x(t) = \frac{1}{2\pi i} \oint \hat{X}(s) e^{st} ds$

$te^{-at}u(t) \ltrans \frac{1}{(s+a)^2}$.

Conjecture: terms of the form $t^n e^{-at} u(t)$ and their anticausal
counterparts are the only kinds that can be combined (subject to matching
RoCs) to produce rational transforms. This means that the impulse response
of any rational transfer function must be the sum of these terms.

In differential equations, you studied simple and multiple roots (which
correspond to simple/multiple poles in our vernacular).

$s + 1 + 1/(s+3)$

(unit doublet)

on one side, you have delta, step, ramp, quadratic. On the other side,
you've got a doublet, second derivative of delta, etc. Delta is $u_0(t)$,
doublet is $u_1(t)$, step is $u_{-1}(t)$, etc.

If not strictlty proper, have polynomial in s.

Method 1: non-transform method
------------------------------
If delta goes into the system, what comes out? $h$. If the unit step goes
in, we get $u*h$.

Method 2: transform method
--------------------------
partial fractions and stuff. Consistent with result of method 1.

Integration in time/transform domain
------------------------------------
Just relabel variables, and it becomes self-evident.

$$
x(t) \ltrans \hat{X}(s)
\\ \int x dt^\prime \ltrans \frac{1}{s}\hat{X}(s)
$$

Steady-State & Transient Response of LTI Systems
================================================

Exactly the same as expected. Note that the second one dies out because of
the pole of the system.

With BIBO-stable system, input pole to right of rightmost pole of system
dominates output.
