EE 120: Signals and Systems
===========================
April 19, 2012.
---------------
Transient/Steady-State Wrap up

Let's talk a bit about a causal BIBO-stable system. Which is usually the
case with practical applications. Has a rational transfer function, so
usually ratio of two polynomials in $s$. Not going to be too concerned
about zeros of system, so we'll write the factored denominator in terms of
the poles of the system.

Assume all poles are simple. All poles are in left half-plane. Also, assume
transfer function is strictly proper.

To this system, I apply a one-sided (causal) complex exponential
signal. What is the output?

transforms and multiplications.

Eigenfunction property (plus other stuff?!).

True for any BIBO-stable function: you can evaluate the Laplace transform
on the $i\omega$ axis and get the Fourier transform for that particular
$\omega$.

What happens to all the terms involving the Rs? These, collectively,
compose your transient response. The last term (result from input)? Doesn't
die out. Steady-state.

What this says is that the system cannot distinguish between $e^{i\omega_0
t}$ and its truncated cousin $e^{i\omega_0 t}u(t)$ if we wait long enough:
i.e. transients become insignificant. Only portion of response that remains
is the one corresponding to $e^{i\omega_0 t}$. Notice that the pole of the
input is to the right of the rightmost pole of the system.

Important: all poles of the system are in the left half-plane, and the pole
of the input is on the $i\omega$ axis, which means it's to the right of the
rightmost pole (and of course the system is causal). Therefore the pole of
the input will dominate the response.

Eigenfunction property applies to steady-state solution. Can also extend to
sinusoids.

Likely a good time to move to the unilateral Laplace transform and how we
can use it to solve ordinary LDEs.

Unilateral Laplace Transform& linear, constant-coefficient differential equations with non-zero initial conditions
==================================================================================================================
Whenever you have nonzero initial conditions, you need to truncate. Trick
used: multiply by unit step, then take Laplace transform. Effectively the
same as taking unilateral Laplace transform.

$\hat{\mathcal{X}}(s) = \int_{0^-}^\infty x(t) e^{-st} dt$. A lot of
textbooks only deal with the unilateral transform because they're
interested in causal systems. As are we, in this context.

If I am looking at the unilateral Laplace transform of $\dot{x}$, one
additional term appears. If we integrate by parts, we can see which this
term must be. In the bilateral case, we evaluated $uv$ at both
infinities. The second term (i.e. $\int vdu$) required that this product
pevaluate to zero at infinities -- otherwise the integral would not
converge.

In the unilateral case, we therefore have an additional term: $-x(0^-)$.

Zero-state, zero-input method. Remember: **different** from transient and
steady-state. Best not to think of these at the same time.

Method 2: use unilateral Laplace transform.

Note that if a signal is causal, its unilateral Laplace transform is the
same as its bilateral Laplace transform.
