EE 120: Signals and Systems
===========================
April 24, 2012.
---------------
DC Motor Control
================

Application of what we've been studying. Way to review and test fluency
with material. We've got a DC motor whose model is some second order linear
differential equation. We've got applied torque and damping. Moment of
inertia of rotor and whatever's hooked up to it.

Transfer function?

Feedback to stabilize the system. Place this in proportional feedback
configuration: only other thing in the feedback system is K, which is a
scalar. Integrator: of form $\frac{1}{s}$. What's the transfer function?
Characteristic polynomial from differential equations.

K must be positive for BIBO stability.

If roots complex, guaranteed stability. Real part of each pole is
$-\frac{D}{2M} < 0$.

Oscillations you get when you have complex poles. Underdamping, critical
damping, overdamping. Robustness discussion.

Bode plots!
===========

Gots two building blocks:

$$
\hat{F}_I(s) = 1 + \frac{s}{\omega_0}
\\ F_I(\omega) = \hat{F}_I(i\omega)
$$

Asymptotic plot of $20\log\abs{F_I}$ and $\angle F_I$. The horizontal axis
is a logarithmic axis.

What happens when $\omega$ is very small? Asymptotically zero. At higher
frequencies, $\omega$ large, so imaginary part will dominate. And so when
you take its magnitude, you jump by 20 every time you increase magnitude by
10 -- slope is 20dB/dec. $\omega_0$ is your corner frequency (named for
obvious reasons). 3dB point: corner frequency. One of foundational blocks
for frequency responses on logarithmic scales. 45 degrees per decade. (use
10x to determine dominance).

This building block is called a regular zero. Not widely used; Babak
learned from circuits professor at CalTech (R.D. Middlebrook).

The second building block is $\frac{s}{\omega_0}$. Simple zero.

Claim: all expressions with real roots can be written as combinations of
these two.

Inverted zero: $1 + \frac{\omega_0}{s}$
