EE 120: Signals and Systems
===========================
January 24, 2012.
-----------------

LTI Systems and Frequency Response
==================================
Freq. response: $H(\omega)$
(continuous-time?)

Will learn set of systems for which sum doesn't converge, so we'll need a
new transform: laplace (Z) transform

Two-point moving average:
-------------------------

$h(n) = (\delta(n) + \delta(n-1))/2$

$H(\omega) = (1 + e^{-i\omega})/2 = e^{-i\omega /2}(e^{i\omega /2} +
	 e^{-i\omega /2})/2 = e^{-i\omega/2}cos(\omega/2)$

frequency response of discrete-time systems is periodic: adding a multiple
of $2\pi$ will not change the result.

$2\pi$-periodicity of discrete-time LTI frequency responses. This means,
naturally, that we don't have to plot our functions everywhere; rather, we
only need to worry about a single period.

(looks like $\abs{cos(\frac{\omega}{2})})$

eigenfunction property of discrete LTI systems -- $e^{i\omega} \to
H(\omega)e^{i\omega}$

$H^*(\omega) = \sum h^*(k)e^{i\omega k}$

conjugate symmetry: $H^*(\omega) = H(-\omega)$. (generalization of "even"
functions)

if $h(n) \in \mathbb{R} \forall n$, $y(n) = Re{H(\omega)e^{i\omega n}} =
|H(\omega )|cos(\omega n+\angle H(\omega))$

$x\to H\to y$

$h(n) = (1-\alpha ^n)/(1-\alpha)$

Ways to determine H(\omega):

Method 1:
---------

$H(\omega) = \sum h(n)e^{-i\omega n} = \sum (\alpha e^{-i\omega})^n$. Use
usual formula for geometric series, since this converges.

Method 2:
---------

Use eigenfunction property of the complex exponential. Frequency response
is probably defined. Let $x(n) \equiv e^{i\omega n}$ (a pure tone).

$y(n) = H(\omega)e^{i\omega n}. y(n-1) = H(\omega)e^{i\omega n}e^{-i\omega}$.
$H(\omega) = 1/(1-\alpha e^{-i\omega})$.

How we can plot the magnitude response
--------------------------------------

eliminate all negative complex exponentials. $\alpha$ is in the unit
circle. $e^{i\omega}$ is a point on the unit circle, so we can represent it
with a vector.

Consider graphically.

