EE 120: Signals and Systems
===========================
January 26, 2012.
-----------------

numerator is 1, denominator is length of vector $e^{i\omega} -
\alpha$. Task: plot ratio as $\omega$ varies.

$1/(1+\alpha), 1/(1-\alpha)$.

frequency response curve should be monotonically increasing from $-\pi$ to
0 and decreasing from 0 to $\pi$. [ talk about inflection points, concavity,
etc. Second derivatives. ]

# Low-pass filter for $0<\alpha<1$. If we understand the geometry for this
  particular case, we can answer design-oriented questions. One question
  is, what if I want to sharpen the peak of this low-pass filter?

  * Answer: have $\alpha$ approach 1. Can't get too close -- real-world has
	noise. Also, in trouble if $\alpha$ jumps onto or outside of the unit
	circle. Algebraic argument available, as well.

	: move $\alpha$ toward the unit circle (but still keep it inside)

# Can I make a high-pass filter out of this?

  * Yes. Set $-1 < \alpha < 0$.
	: take $\alpha$ to $-1 < \alpha < 0$

  * By taking $\alpha$ to be negative, we have the equivalent of a phase
	shift by $\pi$.

# Sharper high-pass filter?

  * Bring $\alpha$ closer to -1.

# What if we want the filter to peak @ an arbitrary frequency, say
  $\omega_0$ = $\pi/4$?

  * Place $\alpha$  along the pole $\theta = \omega_0$.

  $1/(1-\abs{\alpha})$

  observation: this filter is a complex filter (i.e. one whose impulse
  response $h(n)$ is complex valued). This has its uses but is not always
  desirable.

  $h(n) = \alpha^n u(n) = R^n e^{i\omega_0n}$

  $g(n) = h(n)e^{i\omega_0n} \implies G(\omega) = H(\omega -\omega _0)$

Example:
--------
LCCDE: linear constant coefficient difference equation

$y(n) = \alpha y(n-N) + x(n)$. N is a positive integer, not necessarily 1.
$y(-N) = ... = y(n) = 0$

$(\abs{\alpha} < 1)$

$$h_{N}(n) = \alpha h_{N}(n-N) + \delta(n) = !(n % N) && \alpha^{n/N}.
H_{N}(\omega)\\ = \sum_{k=0}^\infty\alpha^{k}e^{-i\omega Nk}
  \sum(\alpha e^{-i\omega N})^k = 1/(1-\alpha e^{-i\omega N})
\\ \abs{H_{N}(\omega)} = \abs{e^{i\omega N}/(e^{i\omega N} - \alpha)}
$$

Use $\omega \equiv \omega N$, then use a change of variables (after
plotting) to recover the initial basis and label axes and whatnot.

Or use some arbitrary argument that it's a contracted version by going back
to $H(\omega)$. Roughly equivalent either way.

Graph of $\abs{H(2\omega)}$, for $0<\alpha <1$.

(No more graphs.)

Comb filter. (pick off values that are multiples of $\pi/N$)

design-oriented analysis. layers like an onion. they fit together very
well.

Analog system
-------------
$g(t) = e^{-\alpha t}u(t), \Re{\alpha} > 0$

$G(\omega) = \int g(t)e^{-i\omega t}dt
   \\ = 1/(\alpha  + i\omega ).
   \\ = 1/(i\omega  - (-\alpha ))$

$\sqrt{\omega ^2 + \alpha ^2}$
