EE 120: Signals and Systems
===========================
January 31, 2012.
-----------------

Homework should be out today. Yes, there are homeworks in this class.

analog system procedure for figuring out frequency response of
systems.

Fourier analysis today. Some of this will be review, but we'll dive
more deeply into the linear algebra in this class.

Roadmap:

 * Fourier Analysis
   "A way of decomposing signals into their constituent frequencies.
   Kind of like the way a prism splits light into its components.
   Fourier analysis gives us the tools we need to analyze signals."
   + Periodic [ in time domain. ]
	 - Discrete time, discrete time Fourier series.
	 - Continuous time, continuous time Fourier series.
   + Aperiodic
	 - Discrete-time Fourier transform.
	 - Continuous-time Fourier transform
   We can put blocks around these. Discrete-time signals are periodic
   in the frequency domain.

   Before I do that, I want to review an abstraction that we use for
   signals (and the way we look at signals) as vectors.

Periodic DT Signals
===================

$x(n+p) = x(n) \forall n \exists p \in \{1,2,3,4,...\}$

p is called the period of x. The smallest p for which this is true is
called the fundamental period.

With discrete-time signals that are periodic, you always have to find out
the period before you can talk about frequencies. $\omega_0\equiv2\pi/p$ is
the fundamental frequency.

Let's say we have a signal defined as ...4/2/4/2/4/2...

We can abstract and represent this signal as a cartesian vector. A
euclidean vector. Namely, I can go to p-space and draw $\mathbf{x}$. I
basically take the values in that one period and stack them
up. $x=[4, 2]$. I can ask you a couple of questions: what the
representation of this vector is in terms of two canonical vectors:
$\psi_0=[1,0]$, $\psi_1=[0,1]$. $\ket{x} = 4\ket{\psi_0} +
2\ket{\psi_1}$. We do this via projection. Or a change of basis. $[4,2] =
4[1,0] + 2[0,1]$. Inner products and stuff. $\braket{x}{\psi_0} +
\braket{x}{\psi_1}$.

$\braket{x}{\psi_0} = (x_0\psi_0 + x_1\psi_1)^T\psi_0 = x_0(\psi_0)^T\psi_0
+ x_1(\psi_1)^T\psi_0 = x_0\psi_0 + 0$.

$x^T\psi_0 = x_0\psi_0^T\psi_0$

$x_0 = x^T\psi_0/(\psi_0^T\psi_0)$

Just use inner product with normalized basis vectors.

In this case, it was easy to find out what the coefficients were. I can
repose the question by changing the $\psi_k$. I'm going to rotate the basis.

Basically, non-normalized sign basis. [3, 1].

[ talk about how we only need two orthogonal vectors, since our fundamental
  period is 2. Don't need a third vector. ]

Now, there's something special about these two frequencies we found.

Harmonics. Integer multiples of the fundamentals. Number of terms equals
period. Certainly what this toy example is indicating.

Now the question is, how do we find these coefficients? Oh wait, we've
already solved that problem.

INTERMISSION
============

I'm going to recast what we just did in matrix-vector form. We said that x
as a vector can be represented as a linear combination of $\psi_0$ and
$\psi_1$. I chose the period over the interval 0 to 1. I can do the same
thing with $\psi_0$ and $\psi_1$.

This is just the matrix for the FT. I have $x = x_0\psi_0 + x_1\psi_1 =
F[x_0,x_1]$, where $F = \begin{bmatrix}1&1\\1&-1\end{bmatrix} =
[\psi_0, \psi_1]$. This is a 2x2 matrix.

I can write this as $x = \Psi X$. Solve for X: left-multiply by inverse Fourier
transform. $F^{-1} = \frac{1}{n}F^\dagger$.

INTERMISSION
============

Once you have complex numbers, you can no longer use the dot product. We
now need the inner product. $\braket{a}{b} = a(T)b^*$. Fails otherwise, since
$\braket{x}{x} \neq \abs{x}$.

$x$ is $p$-periodic.

$\vec{x} = [x(0), ... , x(p-1)]$. I have $\psi_k \perp \psi_l$, where
$b\braket{\psi_k}{\psi_l} = p\cdot\delta_{kl}$.

Proof of orthogonality of $\psi_k$, $\psi_l$, $k \neq l$. Geometric sum,
not very interesting.

$x$ is the linear combination of our $\psi_k$.

$\braket{x}{\psi_l} = X_l\braket{\psi_l}{\psi_l} \implies X_l =
\frac{1}{p} \braket{x}{\psi_l}$.

synthesis equation, analysis equation:

$x(n) = \sum X_k e^{ik\omega_0n}$
$X(n) = \sum x_k e^{-ik\omega_0n}$
