EE 120: Signals and Systems
===========================
February 9, 2012.
-----------------

Discrete-time Fourier transform
===============================

Discrete aperiodic signals. The DTFT can also handle discrete-time periodic
signals, provided that we make use of Dirac deltas in the frequency
domain. You all should remember that the frequency response of a
discrete-time LTI system $H(\omega) = \sum h(\ell)\exp^{-i\omega\ell}$
[DTFT analysis equation]. It turns out this is the DTFT of the impulse
response.

How to go from frequency domain to time domain, i.e. how to derive impulse
response from frequency response.

Our goal is to determine h from H. That's what we want to do. And I'm going
to do this in two ways, both of which rely on things we've already done. So
there's nothing new that I'm going to go through.

Recall: With discrete LTI systems: frequency response has fundamental
period $2\pi$. $H(\omega+2\pi)=H(\omega)$. We already possess the
mathematical machinery to handle periodic continuous variables (i.e. we've
seen this in the CTFS). Then, our continuous variable was time. Now, it's
frequency.

Recall CTFS. $x(t)$. $p$: fundamental period. $\omega_0 = \frac{2\pi}{p}$:
fundamental frequency. We said we can express x as a linear combination of
complex exponentials that are harmonics (integer multiples) of the
fundamental frequency. We had an expression for these. $X_k =
\frac{1}{p}\int x(t)e^{-ik\omega t}$.

I'm going to draw parallels now with the current scenario: $x\to
H$. $t\to\omega$. $p\to2\pi$. $\omega_0=\frac{2\pi}{p}\to\Omega_0 =
\frac{2\pi}{2\pi}=1$. $\therefore X_k = h(-k)$.

Let $k\equiv-\ell$ in equation ($\star$). $H(\omega)=\sum
h(-k)e^{ik\Omega_0\omega}$.

Our coefficients are the $h(-k) = \frac{1}{2\pi} \int_{\avg{2\pi}} H(\omega)
e^{-ik\omega} d\omega$. This is exactly parallel to the previous
expression.

$h(\ell) = \frac{1}{2\pi}\int H(\omega)e^{i\ell\omega}d\omega$. Synthesis
equation.

DTFT equations:
$H(\omega) = \sum h(n)e^{-i\omega n}$.
$h(n) = \frac{1}{2\pi}\int H(\omega)e^{i\omega n}d\omega$.

$h(n) = \int \frac{d\omega H(\omega)}{2\pi}e^{i\omega n}$. Linear combination of
complex exponentials. $H(\omega)$ is a measure of the contribution of
frequency $\omega$ to the function $h$.

For now, we're working with the universe of functions of the continuous
variable $\omega$ which happen to be periodic with period $2\pi$.

Ideal discrete-time Low-pass Filter
===================================

Impulse response $h(n) = \frac{1}{2\pi}\int H(\omega)e^{i\omega n}d\omega$.

$\frac{B}{\pi n} \sin(An)$
