EE 120: Signals and Systems
===========================
February 16, 2012.
-----------------

Discrete-Time Fourier Transform: continued
------------------------------------------

Recall the ideal low-pass filter. In time-domain, it had some
discontinuities. In freq domain, it was NOT absolutely summable. However,
it is square-summable. We have names for signals that behave in these
particular ways.

$\ell_1$ signals: absolutely summable. $\sum \abs{x(n)} < \infty$ (abuse of
notation, but useful at that).

$\ell_2$ signals: Square-summable. $\sum \abs{x(n)}^2 < \infty$. Finite
energy.

For discrete-time, if a signal is $\ell_1$, it is $\ell_2$. Converse not
true.

$\sum\abs{h(n)} = \sum_{n=0 \to \infty} \abs{\alpha}^n =
\frac{1}{1-\abs{\alpha}} < \infty$. $h \in \ell_1 \implies$ finite
$\abs{H(\omega)}$ and smooth.

If $x \notin \ell_1$ but $x \in \ell_2$, you run into a bit of a problem:
cannot use analysis equation, since summation will not converge. But we can
define the Fourier transform in that case to be the limit as $N \to \infty$
of $\sum_{-N \to N} x(n)e^{-i\omega n}$. DTFTs are continuous (not
necessarily smooth / infinitely differentiable).

Turns out we get convergence in energy of the two signals. It's just for
you to bear in mind, since you have an infinite sum. The most well-behaved
functions are $\ell_1$. They have nice DTFTs. Next level up in terms of
misbehavior is $\ell_2$. Fourier transforms cannot be obtained through
analysis equation, but can be reverse-engineered or otherwise. DTFTs have
discontinuities.

We have yet another level up in terms of misbehavior. We have signals of
"slow growth". (zero growth) Examples: $x(n) = 1$, $x(n) = n$, $x(n) =
e^{i\omega_0 n}$. Basically, these are signals that grow no faster than
polynomially in time. (and signals that neither grow nor decay). Notice
these signals $\cap (\ell_1 \cup \ell_2) = null$. Cannot use analysis
equation, but can use synthesis equation. And their DTFTs have Dirac
deltas.

Example:

$x(n) = e^{i\omega_0n} X(\omega)$? $\alpha\delta(\omega-\omega_0$). Strictly
speaking, we'd have to write the spectrum as a sum: we have a delta every
$2\pi$, starting at $\omega_0$. But that's not particularly interesting,
since that looks messy. I'm just interested in the interval here. As long
as we know that it's $2\pi$-periodic.

To get our $\alpha$, we can and will use our synthesis equation:
$\frac{\alpha}{2\pi}\int \delta(\omega-\omega_0 e^{i\omega
n}d\omega$. $\frac{\alpha}{2\pi} e^{i\omega_0n} = e^{i\omega_0n} \implies
\alpha \equiv 2\pi$.

$\pi\delta(\omega-\omega_0) + \pi\delta(\omega+\omega_0)$ ($2\pi$-periodic,
again)

For signals that belong to none of the previous categories, we have to
learn a new transform -- Z-transform! Z-transform! Coming in March, to
theaters near you.

Why do $\ell_1$ signals have finite DTFTs?

triangle inequality, following directly from the synthesis equation.

INTERMISSION
============
DTFT Properties
---------------
# Time-shifting

If I have a signal that's Fourier-transformed? What do I get in the
frequency domain if I shift the original signal?

We get a phase shift: if we shift x(n) by N, our new $X(\omega)$ is
multiplied by $e^{-i\omega N}$.

## Example / curveball

$H(\omega) = e^{-i\omega/2}4$
which yields $h(n)= \frac{(-1)^{n+1}}{\pi}(n-\frac{1}{2})$

Remember: convolution and multiplication are duals over the time and
frequency domains.

Not too long from now, we are going to start studying the sampling
theorem. One way to consider this as a half-delayed sample of X is to think
of X as having samples. We map this to a sequence of samples in continuous
time, split apart by T seconds (sampling period). Interpolation scheme that
we'll learn about, etc. I can shift to the left or right by an arbitrary
amount. So in continuous time, I take this signal and I shift it to the
right by T/2 seconds. So I take whatever this was, take samples spaced T
apart, then convert it back into Kr\"onecker deltas.

This filter is called, for the reason described, a half-sample delay. You
essentially have to interpolate between the frequencies in discrete time
and sample the halfway points.

What happens if I multiply in the time domain by a complex exponential
(modulation)? The frequency domain is convolved with said exponential.

Using the analysis equation,we have $X(\omega) = \sum x(n) e^{i (\omega -
\omega_0) n} = X(\omega-\omega_0)$.

# Multiplying the time domain by $e^{i\omega_0}$ results in a frequency shift.

Multiplying by a complex exponential yields a shift in the other domain.

There is one property that is distinct, and that is the modulation
property (multiplication property).

$q(n) = x(n)y(n) \iff Q(\omega)$. Not an ordinary convolution.

$Q(\omega) = \sum x(n)y(n)e^{-i\omega n}$

In particular, for $x(n)$, use synthesis equation to replace $x(n)$ with
$X(\xi)$ (where $\xi$ is a dummy variable).

$$
Q(\omega) = \frac{1}{2\pi} \sum_n\int_\avg{2\pi}
X(\xi)e^{i\xi n}y(n)d\xi e^{-i\omega n}.
= \frac{1}{2\pi} \int_\avg{2\pi}d\xi X(\xi)\sum_n e^{-i(\omega-\xi)n}y(n)d\xi
= \frac{1}{2\pi} \int_\avg{2\pi}d\xi X(\xi)Y(\omega-\lambda)
$$

What's special about this? It's only over a value of $2\pi$. This is a very
special kind of convolution. We call this a circular convolution of $x$ and
$y$. So $x(n)y(n) \iff \frac{1}{2\pi} (X*Y)(\omega)$.

Think of two functions plotted in terms of $\lambda$. One function, let's
say, is a square pulse wave thingy.

easy way of carrying out circular convolution: take one of the two
functions, keep one replica (e.g. the one from $-\pi$ to $\pi$), and then
do a regular convolution with the other function. advice: choose the
flipped + shifted signal for elimination of replicas.

