CS 262A: Advanced Topics in Computer Systems
============================================
August 27, 2012
---------------
Introduction / Unix
-------------------

Kubi + Joseph. Will talk about over-enrollment later. First things first:
introductions!

Kubi:
=====
designed Alewife (parallel machines, designed hw, helped write
OS). Fair bg in OS; worked for proj. Athena, helped write device drivers +
network fs, OS lead researcher for PARLab (Tessellation OS).

Pretty well known for OceanStore a decade ago. Storing data for thosuands
of years: interesting target. What will not come up otherwise: quantum
computing research.

Joseph:
=======
Mobile computing (built rover toolkit); operating through intermittent
connectivity.

Building scalable systems. RADLab.

Moore's law, etc.
=================
need parallelism.

More cores over time.

Systems Challenges
==================
Scale enormous, heterogeneity, dynamic range. Complexity.

Goals
=====

Common foundation for OS and DB research. Of course, we'll throw in some HW
mechanisms and architecture, and at the higher level, we'll throw in some
dis-sys as well. Why common course? Originally put together by Brewer and
Hellerstein as OS/DB combo course. Based on interesting observation that
the two communities were tackling the same problems with vastly dfiferent
philosophies.

Largely different set of classic papers, community members didn't read
classic papers of other community. In theory, this is part of a two-part
sequence (262B), but that hasn't been taught in many moons.

What's research? Analysis and synthesis together. Understanding others'
work -- both the good and the bad; synthesis is finding new ways to advance
the state of the art -- putting things back together.

A lot of our prelim breadth is about both of this. Systems research has few
provably correct answers; often outright confusion + bad results.

Analysis here is a literature survey. Read interesting historical papers,
modern papers that feed directly from historical papers. Must keep in mind
that all research projects fail somehow; question is whether they were
successful enough to get some interesting results.

Real research! Will suggest some projects to look at in a bit. At the end
of term, poster session where you're going to stand and present your work
to people who walk by. Produce conference paper (conference-format paper)
which, in theory, would be submittable to a conference (with a bit more
work).

Basic foremat: paper-driven lecture format with discussion. Submit online
form before class. Three freebies (where you get by without submitting a
summary). Half a page or less; two most important things and one major
flaw.

Going to read a lot of papers; must learn how to scan through paper and
extract interesting ideas. With historical paper, a lot easier to identify
a flaw -- times change, and today, this would not be appropriate. Modern
papers, more difficult. Think of this as a 262 "where's Waldo". Interested
to see what people come up with, since sometimes people come up with
different things.

This is a grad class, so material may be controversial. Hopefully good
discussions and disagreements?

Topics in this course are about reliable / secure sharing. Lots of
security. Revealed truth (overall principles). We'll look at these topics
from both a DB and an OS perspective. Very interesting to see the different
views which have to run in the same platform and cooperate.

In past, we had an entrance exam. Instead, we will probably cap the class
at 55 people.

Unix Time-Sharing System
========================
Response to Multics. Grabbed some features from Multics.

