EE 105: Devices & Circuits
==========================
Wednesday, January 18, 2012.
----------------------------
semiconductor physics. 3-terminal devices.

Admin Stuff
===========
Office hours:
 * 512 Cory.
 * W 2-3, F 10:30-11:30, by appointment.
Labs:
 * 353 Cory.
 * Partner.
 * No food.
Grading:
 * Homework 20
 * Midterm  20
 * Final    30
 * Lab      20
 * Project  10
Extra credit.
Cheating: strongly discouraged.

bspace, Piazza, web page.

Overview
========
Device Physics
 * bandgap, dopants, PN, etc.
Linearization
 * operating point
 * local derivatives
time/frequency domain analysis
 * Heaviside: ODE -> algebra
 * Bode
 * Feedback <-> stability
I/O impedances

Device Physics
==============
Bohr
----
Hydrogen spectrum. (plots of intensity vs. frequency. Spectral lines)

Quantized energy levels of electrons orbiting atoms. Bohr model, so to
speak: difference of energies would result in the emission of a photon
at a specific frequency, which generates a specific wavelength/color.

Si: 1s2 2s2 2p6 3s2 3p2

Pauli Exclusion Principle
-------------------------
twinning

crystal
 * N atoms. silicon: 5 \cdot 10^{22} per cubic centimeter.
 * N splits per level. Turn effectively into bands.

valence band, conduction band. zero-energy is somewhere, 8 eV away.

At absolute zero, in semiconductors (and insulators), the valence band
is full, and the conduction band is empty.

Conductivity of this material @ T=0 is basically 0. Resistivity is
essentially infinite. I.E. electrons can't move.

Slight chance electrons can jump to a different energy level. In their
place, they leave "holes". now we have non-zero conductivity and
finite resistivity.

The behavior of this follows Fermi-Dirac statistics. i.e. The
probability of one of these energy levels being full depends on the
energy and the temperature.

(you have your standard Fermi distribution)

k_B T = 26 meV @ room temperature.
n_i = 10^{10} electron/hole pairs per cubic centimeter.

Bandgaps:
---------
Si:          1.1 eV, 1.1 um
Ge:          0.67
GaAs:        1.4,    0.8 um
C (diamond): 5.5
GaN:         3.4,    0.35 um

E = hc/λ
λ = hc/E = 1.2 um-eV/E

