EE 105: Devices & Circuits
==========================
Wednesday, February 8, 2012
---------------------------

Talk about RC, LC circuits. If I have a step function that goes from 0 to
some current I, I know the differential equation that governs the current
on this thing is I/C = dV/dt. Pretty straightforward.

Recall RC = τ. There's some voltage that I'm heading to. The thing I want
you to internalize and regurgitate is that the initial slope is where I
want to get in τ seconds.

Small-signal model (SSM)
------------------------

Fleming diode: hot filament + plate (1904). Forest diode: hot filament +
grid + plate (1906): three terminal device. Section where he talks about
the physics of the device. Hilarious.

1948: point-contact transistor. BJT. Three-terminal device. Pretty quickly
after that, people figured out the JFET. Consider N-type material with good
N+ connections to it. Now a resistor. Can calculate resistance based on
geometry + doping.

Now, put in a P+ material here and make this your gate electrode. By
playing with the voltage, we can manipulate the width of the depletion
region. Pinch-off: maximum current you effectively can get. All four of
these devices have the same picture: three-terminal devices, you've got
some control voltage, some output voltage, and there's some output
current. And in every case, I can make a device with some V{supply}, a
resistor, and increasing V{in} causes an increase in I{out}, which causes a
decrease in V{out}. So if I plot V{out} vs. V{in}, I get some kind of a
curve that looks vaguely like logistic decay (?). So that's why we care so
much about the two control parameters.

I(V{in}, V{out}) = string(V{in})weak(V{out}).

∂I/∂V{in} = g{m}: transconductance, ∂I/∂V{out} = g{o}: output conductance;
therefore resistance r{o} = 1/g{o}

We want g{m} to be large and g{o} to be small. Gain is ∂V{out}/∂V{in}.

g{m} = ∂I{c}/∂V{BE} = I{C}/V{T}
