EE 105: Devices & Circuits
==========================
Friday, February 10, 2012
-------------------------

I{c} = I{s} e^{V{be}/V{T}}(1 + V{out}/V{A})
V{out} = V{cc} - RI{s}e^{V{be}/V{T}}(1 + V{out}/V{A})

Don't try to take V{in} up to V{cc}. Explosions bad.

Nice and analytic. This is a transcendental expression. Have to solve
iteratively (e.g. via linearization). Voltage gain = dV{out}/dV{in}, which
is roughly V{out}/V{in}.
I{c}(V{be},V{ce}) = I{c}* + i{c} =I{c}(V{be}*,V{ce}*)+g{m}v{be}+v{ce}/r{p}
Asterisk refers at operating point (small signal model).

g{m} = ΔI/ΔV. g{o} = ΔI/ΔV{ce} ⇒r{o} = ΔV/Δ{I}.

equation of tangent plane at that point.

This is my new circuit now. That looks like voltage controlled current
source (g{m}v{be}) with a collector node, an emitter node, base node,
etc. So the real device is linearization + operating point + higher order
terms we ignore.

So what does that mean when we look at that thing? There's other things in
there. There's a voltage source. What does that voltage source look like
that's supplying V{cc}? A real voltage source has some source resistance on
it, and so if I want to look at my output voltage here, then I get that the
current I = (V{out}-V{cc})/R{s} for this device. Actual IV relationship of
this non-ideal voltage source. The linear version of this is dI/dV{out},
which is 1/R{s} = g{out}. r{out} = 1/g{out} = R{s}. Any voltage source gets
replaced in the small signal model by an R{s}. R{s} = 0 ⇒ ground
("small-signal ground").

Similarly, by the same argument, a current source also turns, at small
signals, into an R{s}. An ideal current source has a parallel resistance of
∞. If R{s} is infinite, this turns into the empty set: an open circuit. No
current flows into it no matter what voltage change you make.

Steps: Replace voltage source with a ground, replace transistor with
linearized version current source and resistor in parallel, emitter
grounded. Large signal turns into a short. Voltage source called little
v{be}. Both of these go to ground. If we have some source resistance, that
would be R{c}. We ignore because it's usually many orders of magnitude
larger than source resistance.

Kirchoff's current laws. g{m}v{be} + v{o}/R{out} = 0. We'll do this a lot
of times.

So we have v{o}/v{be} = -g{m}R{out} ≡ A. G{M} =∂I{o}/∂V{I}
G{out} = ∂I{o}/∂V{out} = 1/R{out}.

g{o} ≠ I{c}/V{ce}. Definitely not. It's the derivative of the curve. Don't
make that mistake.

Metal-oxide semiconductors. Used to have metal gates, but now have silicon
gates. Not really metal, but they're heavily doped, so it looks like it.

BJT: I{c} = I{s}e^{V{be}/V{T}}(1 + V{ce}/V{A}).

MOS: I{D} = C{1}(V{gs}-V{th})²(1 + v{ds}/v{a}). Exact analogues. Another
three-terminal device, weak function of input, strong function of output.

BJTs are much better, but MOS you can fit many more on a chip.

So same weak function part (early effect and all) and strong function part
(but now it's a quadratic, not an exponential). Normally,v{gs}-v{th} is
about a couple hundred millivolts (whereas V{T} is 26mV @ room temp).

g{o} = ∂I{o}/∂V{DS} = 1/V{A}I{D}, r{o} = V{A}/I{D}. Instead of talking
about V{A} in the MOS world, we talk about λ ≡ 1/V{A}. Consider λ as
percent change per volt. So if it's .1, it's changing 10% per volt. etc.

changes from n-type to p-type locally. you put a field across there, and
you have a mobility as they move. the oxide capacitance here is critical in
determining how that happens. smaller gap => larger capacitance.

I{D} = μ{n}C{ox}/2 (V{gs}-V{th})²(1 + λV{DS})
