EE 105: Devices & Circuits
==========================
Monday, February 13, 2012
-------------------------

Physics of MOSFETs
------------------

Discovered and patented in 1927. Going to be black magic for just a
minute. For now: recall, in a reverse-biased diode,when we have a voltage
source that makes the N-side more positive than the P-side, it takes the
existing depletion region and pushes the carriers away and expands the
depletion region. Capacitance as a function of V₀ = C{j₀}/√(1 +
V{A}/V{D}). C vs. V{r}looks vaguely concave down.

What happens now if we make the same structure but put an insulator between
them? I've still got an N-region and a P-region, but now I'm going to put a
nearly perfect insulator in the middle (typically SiO₂ in the old
days). The fact that silicon dioxide forms a tight, stable oxide with
silicon (high temps) is the main reason why silicon took off.Germanium, not
so much.

Putting a voltage across, you largely get the same things happening. Still
have depletion region expanding. We can call this something oxide
silicon. If you dope it sufficiently, it looks like a metal. Fermi level
goes up, electrons go into the conduction band.

Polycrystal silicon: "metal". We still experience the same sort of
curve. If I go positive enough on the voltage, we'll see a very abrupt
shift to a higher capacitance level. Turns out this happens in both the
forward as well as reverse direction. Capacitance is just oxide
capacitance. What happens is that I end up bending the bands and make the
insulator locally n-type. Discovered + patented by Lillian Field in 1927.

The result of this is that I can make a device where I've got a p-type
substrate, infuse in two places an n+ region, and I put this gate
(typically n+ silicon) on top of a layer of SiO₂. You generally take teh
substrate and put it at the lowest level.

If we put a positive voltage, we get a resistance between the two
sides. Since this is a capacitor, I don't have to put any current directly
into the gate to make it work.

Right now, if you look at the charge density σ[C/cm²] = #cbe/cm²

Separation between the source and drain is length of the transistor. The
width into the board is called W, the width of the transistor. This is
telling me that I've got a sheet of charge. If I put a potential across,
charge moves. σ = C{ox}(V{GS}-V{thresh}). V{gs}>V{th}.

V{G} on gate, V{D} on drain. Assume for now that V{D} ≪ V{GS}-V{th}
(overdrive voltage). We can say, then, that our charge density under the
gate is as stated above, our electric field is just potential V{DS}/L, and
we get a velocity out of this v=μ{n}E. So now we can just puzzle out what
the current has to be. The current I{D} = σ[C/cm²]W[cm] ⇒ [C/cm] v[cm/s] ⇒
[C/s] = [A]

I = C{ox)(V{gs} - V{th})Wμ{n}V{DS}/L = μ{n}C{ox}W/L(V{GS}-V{th})V{DS}

μ{n}C{ox}: Fabrication process & materials dependent.
W/L      : geometry.
V{GS}-V{th}: also fab process?

So now we've made ourselves a resistor. Sometimes people draw this as a
resistor with a gate (when it's used as a resistor).

R{on} = V{DS}/I{D}. calculations result in 5Ω.

V{G} - V{chann} - V{th} ⇒ V{cc} - V{th}. 〈σ〉 = average charge density in
channel. 〈σ〉 =C{ox}(V{gs} - ½V{DS} - V{th}).

So now, if I plug that in, do the same calculation, then I get I{D} =
μ{N}C{ox}(V{GS} - ½V{DS} - V{th})V{ds}

r{on} = 1/g{on}. Slope in there is g{on}. As we increase V{gs}, we increase
charge density and max allowed electric field.

V{ds,max} = V{gs} - V{th}. I{d,max} = μ{n}C{ox}/2 W/L (V{gs} - V{th})². So
now we're getting close. We've got this quadratic behavior of V{gs}.

Where does this come from? As I increase V{gs}, charge density increases
linearly. Also increasing linearly is the amount I can put on the drain.

As you're increasing V{gs}, you're increasing energy density.
