EE 105: Devices & Circuits
==========================
Monday, February 27, 2012
-------------------------
Body effect, Current mirrorers, Voltage followers
-------------------------------------------------
$\let\onabla\nabla
\renewcommand{\vec}[1]{\overset{\rightharpoonup}{#1}}
\renewcommand{\nabla}{\vec{\onabla}}
\newcommand{\div}{\vec{\onabla}}
$

We know that MOSFETs actually have 4 terminals: gate, source, drain, and
body (biasing the P-). By now, in the MOS, if I'm looking at voltage,
$\Phi$ as a function of x going straight down the gate, in the p-type
substrate, I've got some $\Phi_p$, short the gate with the substrate, get
some potential across the oxide. Finally, bring gate voltage up enough that
I bring the surface potential $\Phi_s$ to the point that it's equal in
magnitude but opposite in sign so we go from having n-type to having p-type
in the channel.

In particular, let's keep the source grounded, but let's assume that we're
going to put a different voltage on the bulk, and that's $V_{SB}$. So first
off, if I make the source lower than the bulk ($V_{BS} > 0$; source lower
potential than body). You generally do NOT forward bias source/body
diode. In general, you reverse-bias the source/body diode.

What's going on? You're making your transistors in a p-type substrate. You
make a bunch of different transistors. Somewhere on there you've got your
p-type contact. If you do anything with that NMOS transistor (aside from
set source to ground), you are going to have a bias on this junction.

In particular, when you make your source follower, if you make it with a
single transistor and a resistor, you get to hook the bulk and the source
together in your ALD1106. Current source: MOSFET (ground
substrate). Positive $V_{SB}$ bias for upper device, and for other device,
$V_{BS} = 0$. The whole point of MOS electrostatics was so that we could
write down what $V_{th}$ was.

$V_{SB} > 0$: What was the effect on $V_{th}$?
----------------------------------------------
assume grounded source, putting $V_{SB}$ bias. 

I know what I need to get inversion, I've got $\Phi_p$. Turns out the
formula we had before (what the charge is and what we're going to include
in there).

What you get is that $V_{th,0} = V_{FB} - 2\Phi_p + \frac{1}{C_ox} \sqrt{
2q \epsilon_s N_A (-2\Phi_p)}$.

(we now call $\sqrt{ 2q \epsilon_s N_A (-2\Phi_p)}$ $Q_{dep,0}$)

So now we get that $V_{th} = V_{th,0} + \frac{1}{C_ox}\sqrt{2q \epsilon_s
N_A (-2\Phi_p + V_SB)} - \frac{1}{C_ox}Q_{dep,0}$.

And so what I get is that $V_{th} = V_{th,0} + \gamma(\sqrt{-2\Phi_p +
V_{SB}} - \sqrt{-2\Phi_p})$, $\gamma \equiv \frac{1}{C_ox}\sqrt{2q
\epsilon_s N_A}$. $\gamma \approx 0.5 [\sqrt{V}]$.

In particular, you've got a figure on your datasheet that shows (with the
gate-drain hooked together and source grounded and applying a potential
difference $V_{SB}$ between the source and body) a plot of $V_{GS}$
vs. $I_D$ at various values of $V_{SB}$.

Remember $I_D = \frac{\mu_n C_{ox}}{2}\frac{W}{L}\left(V_{GS} - V_{th}
\right)^2(1 + \lambda V_{DS})$ (where $V_{GS} > V_{th}$, $V_{DS} > V_{GS} -
V{th} = V_{DSAT}$).

Not quite quadratic -- superquadratic, rather. So. This is $V_{th,0}$, and
you did this measurement in lab 4. If you put 12V here, then you know that
you're going to end up with a larger threshold voltage, and it takes off.

This is called the body effect. 

If I start with an n-type in separate wells, they can have separate body
substrates. Normally, I can have the p-well down to ground, but if I'm
doing something where I'm stacking these devices (i.e. in a chain;
cascaded), your source follower with a current follower node, $V_{in}$ is
tied to the drain of this transistor down there.

Triple-well process, where you can make PMOS transistors in my n-type
substrate. Put p+ on either side. Both of these two transistors in the same
bulk. Various dopings for isolation of wells, so we can make separate body
contacts for each of them. These days, you throw a lot of different dopants
to make all sorts of things. Not the luxury you have in older / cheaper
processes. You'll have to deal with the fact that one of your transistors
likely won't be made in a well.

Mirrors
-------

Diode connected. You do the same thing with a MOSFET, I still have a
two-terminal device. With a BJT, I had an exponential relationship with
current; with a MOSFET, current goes quadratically. When you make a current
mirror, it's very common to use a resistor. Stuff about current vs. bias
voltage. If you want a mA of current, you just have to set your resistor to
go through a specific point (linearization with transcendental equations).

$V = IR$, or equivalently, $\vec{J} = \sigma \vec{E}$.

A resistor is a pretty lousy current source.
