EE 105: Devices & Circuits
==========================
Wednesday, February 29, 2012
----------------------------
Lab 5
Lab 5 reports
body offset
impedance of passives
amplifier types
in/out resistance

Lab 5 parts 1-4: do the experiment during week 7, turn in report during
week 8. Parts 5-6: folded into week 8.

Handout: rubric regarding specifications of lab report.

Body offset?
------------
Recall stuff.

Passives
--------
$I = C\deriv{V}{t}$, $V = L\deriv{I}{t}$. $V = V_0\sin(\omega t)
\implies \deriv{V}{t} = \omega V_0\cos(\omega t) \implies I = C\omega
V_0\cos(\omega t)$. $"R" \equiv Z = \frac{V}{I} = \frac{V_0\sin\omega
t}{C\omega V_0\cos(\omega t)}$. $\abs{Z} = \frac{1}{\omega C}$.

We can do a similar thing and get $\abs{Z_L} = \omega L$. On the homework,
we're supposed to plot magnitude of impedance vs frequency on a log-log
plot.

Amplifier types
===============

Voltage amplifier
-----------------
You'd like input resistance to be very large (ideally
infinite), and output resistance to be very small (ideally zero). $A_v =
\frac{v_o}{v_{in}}$

Current amplifier
-----------------
$A_i = \frac{i_o}{i_{in}}$. Here, we want our output impedance to be infinite
and our input impedance to be infinite. $A_i = \frac{i_o}{i_{in}}$

Transconductance amplifier
--------------------------
Mixed. Voltage in, current out. Ideally input and output impedances
infinite. $G = \frac{i_o}{v_{in}}$

Finally, transresistance amplifier.
-----------------------------------
Output resistance 0, input resistance 0 (ideally). $R = \frac{v_o}{i_{in}}$

+-----+-------+-------+
|O / I|   V   |   I   |
+-----+-------+-------+
|  V  |0$A_v$ | 0 R 0 |
+-----+-------+-------+
|  I  |  $G$  | $A_i$0|
+-----+-------+-------+

Input/output resistance.
------------------------

On the input, you'll have some $R_s$. You'll have some $R_{out}$. You'll
have some output load actuator, and it'll have some load resistance
$R_L$. Both input and load resistances reduce our gain, which is
unfortunate.

Microphone and speaker.

Microphone impedance: electrets that have $R_s > 1M$ (JFET typically has on
the order of $1k$). Could have voice coil that has an $R_s$ on the order of
$1\Omega$. So that can vary.

On the speaker side.

Voice coils. Anywhere from 4, 8, 16 $\Omega$ for common speakers. Or you
can be fancy and use electrostatics (rub graphite on mylar film, put
between two fine sheets of metal, put voltage between the sheets, move
mylar back and forth. Really hurts when you touch both sides.)

Depends what combination of speaker/microphone you've got in order to
decide what values you want.

So let's say we've purchased a bare electret microphone (no integrated JFET
that you'd normally find with these things). So let's say $R_s \equiv
1M\Omega$, $V_o = 20mV$ @ desired input volume. You've found a speaker,
it's a standard 8 $\Omega$ voice coil speaker, and you've decided that you
want 1W of power from this speaker (dissipated). So $P = \frac{V^2} {2R}
\implies V = 4V$ (sinusoidal input). Suppose you take some bias voltage,
and you stick it into a common emitter amplifier.

Take $\beta \equiv 200$, $V_A \equiv 50V$, $I_s \equiv 1 pA$.

Two issues: huge output resistance relative to load resistance, voltage
division, so output voltage isn't really 5V.

Voltage follower would work just fine. But here's the problem: I have this
thing biased @ 5V, voltage drop maybe 0.8V, so we've got half an amp
flowing through a resistor.

Any reason why we need that speaker directly coupled to the output?
Nope. (buffer?!) decoupling, DC-blocking, big, infinite <- all describing
some capacitor that we use to block out the DC signal. We want its
impedance to be small relative to 8$\Omega$. So we'd like $\frac{1}{\omega
C} \ll 8\Omega \implies C \gg \frac{1}{\omega 8\Omega}$. Frequency of
interest of a good system is 20 Hz to 20 kHz, or 120-120k rad/sec. high
frequencies aren't worrisome. So we want C $\gg \frac{1}{120 rad/sec \cdot 8
\Omega} \implies C \gg 1 mF$.

I still have this problem that I've got my amplifier, and I've got an 8
$\Omega$ load here, so I'd still like to stick something in there such that
our output resistance is much less than 8 $\Omega$, and $R_in \gg 1k$ (for
"much greater than", factor of 10 is roughly sufficient).

So we have yet another with $r_\pi$, so we need to put in yet another
unity-gain buffer (totally different specs regarding impedance, though).
