EE 105: Devices & Circuits
==========================
Friday, March 2, 2012
---------------------

Standard diode bridge, allows you to efficiently convert AC to
DC. Full-wave rectifier. So now you've got your diode bridge going,
typically, to some bypass capacitor, and then back those into a regulator,
and you've already seen the very simplest regulator is just a
reverse-biased zener diode. And then you've got your regulated supply out.

You can imagine with your regulator, you can actually set the voltage this
thing regulates. One common regulator, actually, is a comparator driving a
MOSFET. Feedback-controlled regulator. So now, the amount of current I pull
out of the transformer depends on what load I hang off of it.

There's no direct relationship between symbols for ground.

LAST TIME:
==========
If I have a voltage amplifier, I know that this thing has some input
impedance $R_{in}$, some voltage source that has some output impedance
$R_{out}$, and we have some gain. And then I have a voltage source. It has
some intrinsic source resistance $R_s$.

For a voltage amplifier, to make it ideal, our input impedance should be
infinite. Real systems, 10 $M\Omega$ is pretty common. For very fancy
systems, 1 $G\Omega$. Beyond that, you get very weird effects.

Basically, you get that $V_{in} = \frac{R_{in}}{R_{in} + R_s}}V_s$;
$V_{out} = AV_s\frac{R_{in}}{R_{in} + R_s}\frac{R_L}{R_L + R_{out}}$. This
is assuming that $R_s \ll R_{in}$, $R_{out} \ll R_L$.

We can do the exact same thing for current. We start out with our source,
and we'd like to build an amplifier such that we see all of that
current. The only way to guarantee that is by having $R_{in}$ just be a
short.

Intrinsic Gain
--------------
We looked at common-emitter amplifiers, and we know that the gain is $g_m$
multiplied by the resistance. So what if instead of putting a resistance
there, I put a perfect current source? What's the gain now? The way to do
this is draw the small-signal model, and normally, if we have a resistor up
there, we draw that resistance up to an AC ground. If I put a current
source there, I still draw that resistance. But if this is an ideal current
source (i.e. infinite output impedance), then this goes away.

So if I use conservation of current, $g_m v_i + \frac{1}{R_o} v_o = 0
\implies \frac{v_o}{v_i} = -g_m r_o$.

So both the MOSFET and the BJT, this is the gain for an ideal current
source (intrinsic gain). You can make a current source that has a much much
bigger input impedance than $r_o$, and then this becomes a pretty good
approximation.

For BJT, we have that $g_m = \frac{I_C}{V_T}$, $v_o = \frac{V_A}{I_c}$;
$g_m r_o = \frac{v_A}{V_t} > 1000$.

We will see things like $\frac{1}{g_m}$ in parallel with $r_o$. So just for
completeness with the MOSFET, there are many ways to write $g_m$. $g_m =
\frac{2I_D}{V_{D,SAT}}$; $r_o = \frac{1}{\lambda I_D}$. So $g_m r_o =
\frac{2}{\lambda V_{D,SAT}}$. $\lambda$, for your transistors is like
0.02, 0.01. For this class, whenever you see $g_m r_o$, you may assume that
$g_m r_o \gg 10$.

So $r_o$ is a device parameter, and when you put the device in a circuit,
you start talking about the input and output resistance of that circuit. In
particular, if you think of two different examples, might be using in
common-emitter with emitter grounded.

Find operating point, draw small signal model, find $\frac{v_i}{i_i}$. That
gives you your $r_o, g_m, r_\pi$. So now we draw our small-signal model,
and clearly $v_i = i_i r_\pi$ in this simple circuit.

[ insert derivation here. ]

$$
v_i - v_o = i_i r_\pi = v_{in}
\\ v_o = v_i - i_i r\pi, v_{be} = v_i - v_o
\\ \frac{1}{R_x} v_o - g_m v_{be - \frac{1}{r\pi}v_{be} = 0
\\ \frac{1}{R_x}v_o = \left(g_m + \frac{1}{r_\pi}\right)i_i r_\pi
\\ r_{in} = r_\pi + (\beta + 1)R_x
$$


