EE 105: Devices & Circuits
==========================
Monday, March 5, 2012
---------------------
Last time: real amplifiers; idealized model.

Result is you get two voltage dividers.

Similarly, you'll get a voltage divider on the output.

On the lab, in addition to doing parts 5 and 6 from last time's, you'll be
designing an amplifier.

Output buffer, etc. The idea is to give you some additional sense as to why
you care.

$V_i = V_{BE} + V_{out}$. $V_{BE} = I_i r_\pi$. $V_{out} = I_x R_x$. So we
get that $V_i = i_i r_\pi + i_x R_x$. $i_x = i_i + g_m V_{BE} = i_i + g_m
i_i r_\pi = i_i(1 + g_m r_\pi) = i_i(1 + \beta)$. This matches what we
know.

Plugging this back in, we have $v_i = i_i r_pi + i_i(1 + \beta)R_x$, and
$R_{in} = \frac{v_i}{i_i} = r_\pi + (1 + \beta)R_x$. $R_{in} = \frac{\beta
V_T}{I_C} + (1 + \beta)(r_o \parallel R_E) = \frac{\beta V_T}{I_C^*} + (1 +
\beta)(\frac{V_A}{I_C^*} \parallel \frac{V_E^*}{I_C^*})$

($r_o = \frac{V_A}{I_C^*}$, $R_E = \frac{V_E^*}{I_C^*}$)

So this is equivalent to $\frac{\beta V_T}{I_C^*}(1 +
\beta)\frac{V_C^*}{I_C}$.

When looking for output impedance, input is not moving. $R_{out} = r_\pi
\parallel r_o \parallel R_E \parallel \frac{1}{g_m} \approx
\frac{1}{g_m}$. So why do we care about input and output impedance? From a
high level point of view, affects gain of amplifier.

Amplifier Gain
==============
Taylor + IFT. $I_o(V_I, V_o)$. Nonlinear. Find operating point: $(V_I^*,
V_o^*)$. And current at that point is 0. You can generalize this, but let's
ignore that for now.

We also know that from Taylor, if we know an operating point, we can
approximate this with linearization (valid close to operating point).

$I_o(V_I, V_i) = I_o(V_I^*, V_o^*) + \pderiv{I_o}{V_I}V_I +
\pderiv{I_o}{V_o}V_o$. x$G_m v_i + G_o v_o = 0$.

$$A_v = -G_m R_o$$ This is still true of many systems outside of circuits.

Specific operating point will lead to no current flow -- no imbalance to
correct.

Apply $v_o$, calculate $i_o$, $v_i$ shorted. $G_m = \frac{g_m}{V_i}\bigg|
_{V_o=0}$

Do the same later: apply $v_i$, calculate $i_o$ with $v_o$ shorted.

So... let's do a simple example that we already know the answer to.

We are going to wiggle around the operating point that we found.

In this simple case, our transconductance is 0, so we just have $R_o =
\frac{V_o}{I_o}\bigg|_{V_i=0} = r_o \parallel R_D$. So now let's make it a
little harder. Bipolar emitter source degeneration: bunch of reasons to do
it. One is that it stabilizes the gain.

On the homework this week, you'll see that the same circuit for bipolar, if
the source degeneration is 0, if you vary process ($I_s$, $V_A$, $\beta$,
$\mu_n$, $C_{ox}$, $V_{th}$, $\lambda$), voltage ($V_{CC}$, $V_{DD}$),
temperature (also, heating) -- "PVT".


