EE 105: Devices & Circuits
==========================
Friday, March 9, 2012
------------------------

* lab hints
  + LTSpice
  + BJT tester
	- in digital voltmeter.
  + MOS test?
    - simplest thing to do, connect gate and drain to 100k resistor to Vdd,
	  make sure that's 0.7 V.

Frequency response
==================

First thing: make sure we agree what the equivalent resistance is of two
resistors in parallel and in series. Equivalent resistance of the two is
the maximum of the two. Maximum error is 50%. In parallel, we use minimum
of the two. Also max error of 50%.

Worst-case error happens when your impedances are equal in magnitude.

So right now, that's what you do.

In particular, if you have an R and a C in parallel, and you want to know
what impedance I see, what the magnitude of that impedance is, I'm just
going to take the minimium of the magnitude of the impedances, which is
simply $\min(R, \frac{1}{\omega C}$. On a log-log plot, we draw R = 1k,
$\frac{1}{\omega C}$ -- on a log-log plot, that's a straight line with
slope -1. SO that's $\frac{1}{\omega C}$. Since we're considering these in
parallel, always take the lower line. There's some error (off by
$\sqrt{2}$), but that doesn't really matter.

Tempted to draw capacitive load to $V_{dd}$, but it doesn't really
matter. All it means is that it's shorting out a resistor at high
frequencies.

One more review thing from last time: potatoes?

Comparing amplifiers. $A_v = -g_m(R_c\parallel r_o)$. In general, this is
$-g_mR_c$. Once we add in a resistance, we have $R_o = R_c \parallel r_o(1
+ g_mR_E)$; $G_m = \frac{g_m}{1+g_mR_E}$; $A_v = -G_mR_o = -\frac{R_c}
{R_E}$.

Gain from base to collector is going to be -10.


