EE 105: Devices & Circuits
==========================
Wednesday, March 14, 2012
------------------------

PNP, PMOS

For the PNP, we have

	E P+ (highest doping)
	B N
	C P

(depletion region between B and C; E at higher potential $V_{cc}$; EB
forward-biased, BC reverse-biased. Large hole current now going straight
across, small number of holes that recombine; small electron current.

Still current multiplication. The arrow is drawn from positive to negative.

$\abs{I_c} = \abs{I_s} e^{\abs{V_{BE}}/V_T}\parens{1 + \frac{\abs{V_{CE}}}
{V_A}}$

We need that $V_{BE} < 0$. Similarly, $V_{CE} < 0$. Finally, $I_c < 0$, so
$I_s$ must also be negative. Reasoning: to get forward active, we have
holes flooding in; we want the junction to be reverse-biased so there's a
field that naturally pushes holes and electrons back. But then, with this
upper forward-biased diode, we have electrons flooding across.

So what's the result of this? If we plot, we're going to find that you
actually need $V_{CE} < V_{CE,sat}$

Region before you hit forward-active. Looks like with NPN, except our axes
are both negative, now.

Now, if you're in your local coordinate system (sitting at your bias
point), now the question is if I make a small change in $V_{CE}$, I am
going to have a positive $I_C$. Purpose: small-signal model will look exactly
the same as in the NPN.

	             VDD
	           ___|___
	          [       ]
	__________=========_____________
	   \_P+_/           \_P+|N+_/

Pretty close to flat-band, but not quite. As I make this more negative,
surface is going to start getting depleted of electrons, and I am going to
expose the positive carriers. Eventually, it's going to bend down far
enough that the surface potential crosses zero, so right at the surface,
I'll start seeing mobile holes.

And when it bends down even further (i.e. $-\Phi_n$). As long as this drain
is a little more negative than the source, all of the holes are going to
want to flow that way. I need that $V_{DS} < V_{GS} - V_{th}$. etc. With
our graph, again, we have negative axes. In this case, $V_{GS} < V_{th} <
0$ -- consider that $\abs{V_{GS}} > \abs{V_{th}}$. Pulldown.

Again, in our local coordinate system, this looks identical to what we
saw before (with NMOS).

The thing I want you to remember is that all four of these devices, and in
fact JFETs, and in fact vacuum tubes, and everything else, all of them
looks like this: control (pops between curves), output (looks more or less
linear), in all of them, positive change in voltage means positive
differential change in current (whether positive current getting
bigger or negative change becoming less negative).

Result: if I draw a PNP common-emitter, the small-signal model is just a
mirror image of what we're used to. Positive input means output goes
down. Small positive change on input voltage: less current flowing in
resistor, so output goes down. So in both cases: small positive change in
input means output goes down.

CMOS inverter: NMOS tied to a PMOS. (gates connected, drains connected)

Similarly, if I've got a $V_{BN}$ and a $V_i$, then what do I get? $R_{out}
= R \parallel R_{DN}$; $R_{DN} = g_{m2}r_{o2}r_{o1}$. The last one before
we move on is two PMOS on top of two NMOS. You can make very high gains
doing this.

Let's talk a little bit about Oliver Heaviside. Difficult person to get
along with, but amazing guy.

Suppose we've got a serise RC circuit. $i_c = C\pderiv{V_o}{t}$; $i_R =
\frac {V_i - V_o}{R}$. So $RC\pderiv{V_o}{t} = \Delta V_i - V_o$. If we
assume $V_i = V_x\sin(\omega t)$, we know that $V_o = V_A\sin(\omega t) +
V_B\cos(\omega t)$; $\pderiv{V_o}{t} = \omega V_A\cos\omega t - \omega
V_B\sin\omega t$. The only way there can be a solution of the equation
means that the sum and cosine coefficients have to balanced (method of
undetermined coefficients).

cosine and sine axes: real and imaginary. Math works out beautifully.
