EE 105: Devices & Circuits
==========================
Friday, March 16, 2012
------------------------

MT2 - Friday in class. OBONNS. Right before spring break.

Heaviside, $H(j\omega)$, Spice, emitter/source impedance, single-pole
systems.

Heaviside
=========
Energy-storing elements correspond to poles. Derivatives of output.

$x + jy \equiv Re^{j\theta}$. That angle $\theta$ just corresponds directly
to the phase of the sine wave.

So when you go through and replace all these derivatives by a $j\omega$
term to rotate you 90 degrees and scale you appropriately according to the
frequency, and you transform this whole thing, the next short-hand is when
people get tired of writing $j\omega$, they start calling it $s$. This then
starts looking like a polynomial in $s$.

At the end of the day, when we solve for gain ($V_o/V_i$, it then becomes a
ratio of two polynomials in $s$. This is our transfer function. At the end
of the day, we have $R(s)e^{i\theta(s)}$. If I've got a linear system
that's defined by a differential equation relating derivatives of the
inputs to derivatives of the outputs, the magnitude of the vector
corresponds to the magnitude amplification of a sine, and the phase
corresponds to the phase shift of the same sine.

There are some beautiful things people have done.

Clearly, from this, $R = \abs{H(j\omega)}$, $\theta = \angle
H(j\omega)$. This is pretty powerful. It means that as long as I've got a
linear system, I can get this transfer function. From that one function, I
can tell you what the corresponding output is for any input.

So that's the magic that Oliver Heaviside gave to us. Heaviside was the guy
who used this to solve differential equations for circuits. Laplace didn't
know that his integral could be used to solve differential equations.

SPICE
=====
Spice does all these different analyses. It does a DC or operating point
analysis. Operating point says we'll solve nonlinear algebraic equations
(i.e. no time-variance). Capacitors are open, and inductors are shorted
(i.e. $\omega = 0$. You've seen that, and it takes your nonlinear circuit
and figures out that when you put in a particular set of DC biases, it'll
go through and tell you the whole system is operating here.

That's .op.

DC is just a sweep of those, It's just a sequence of .op samples.

If you pick a particular operating point, at that operating point, we have
a linearized model of the transistor. Once we pick the bias point, we can
take derivatives, and make this nonlinear device into circuits made of
linear components.

Once we've taken the linearization, now we have an (linear!) ordinary
time-invariant differential equation. You can either solve this yourself or
have SPICE do it. For simple circuits, you'll get the same answer as
SPICE. For complex circuits, you'd get the same answer if you had the
time.

AC analysis: Bode plot of linearized system -- linearized around a
particular operating point. In particular, different operating points
correspond to completely different Bode plots.

Most SPICEs allow you to vary multiple voltage sources simultaneously.

You tell AC what amplitude you want. In AC, you use a start and end
frequency, step size (how many per decade), linear / logarithmic;
somewhere, there's a source. And all this does is scale the output. That's
something to keep in mind: just because .ac tells you something is going to
work, that doesn't mean it will.

TO capture this, that's transient analysis. Transient is the full nonlinear
time-varying differential equation. There's still ordinary differential
equations (they're not partial differential equations), but they're no
longer linear.

Transient actually is your best guess as to what's going to show up on the
oscilloscope.

.ac gives you an idea of what a sinusoid will look like.

It turns out, by the way, that this concept works for way more than
integrated circuits. You can use the same tools to compose mechanical
elements in MEMS devices. Came up with SUGAR (doesn't stand for
anything). Worked fine.

Back to looking at impedance. So we saw that when you look down into the
drain of a transistor at some $R_s$ or into the collector of a BJT at some
$R_E$, $R_o = r_o(1 + g_mR_s) \approx g_mr_mR_s$. So what if I'm looking
up at a drain resistance? How do we do this? Find an operating point, draw
small signal model, apply small signal test voltage, calculate values.

The key thing to note here is that you don't know how the current splits
between devices, but all of it goes through $R_D$. So the voltage at the
drain is equal to $i_xR_D$. We also know that $V_{GS} = 0 - V_x$, and
$V_{DS} = i_xR_D - V_x$. So if we do KCL at $V_x$, the sum of all currents
entering that node has to be zero, so $i_x + g_m v_{gs} + \frac{1}{ro}
v_{ds} = 0$. We want to find $R_{out} = \frac{V_{out}}{i_x} = \frac{1}{g_m}
\parens{1 + \frac{R_D}{r_o}}\parens{\frac{1}{1 + \frac{1}{g_m
r_o}}}$. Roughly $1/g_m (R_D \ll r_o)$; $R_D/g_mr_o (R_D \gg r_o)$

Good idea on your exams is to check your formulas and make sure everything
you're adding together has the same unit.

SO: what we see is that if you put something on the source, it looks bigger
when seen from the drain, and when you put something on the drain, it looks
smaller when seen from the source.

Good midterm question is "looking into each of these nodes, what impedance
do I see?"

