EE 105: Devices & Circuits
==========================
Monday, March 19, 2012
----------------------

Single-pole systems, Bode plots. Homework, just posted solutions. Would
encourage to treat homework as midterm. Sit down and see what you get.

Midterm covers everything. Stuff on homework, stuff on the labs. MOS
physics. A little about potential in the cross-section of a MOS device.

That midterm is not a perfect reflection of what you're going to see.

If we just look at our amplifier with some output resistance driving some
load (perhaps resistive), then it's certainly in parallel. Whether you make
this a MOS or bipolar amplifier with capacitances to ground or some fixed
voltage, there's always going to be some intrinsic capacitance.

You know your gain is the $g_m$ times the output impedance. We know
impedance of capacitors goes down with frequency, etc. So what you end up
with is a very common thing: current source of $G_mv_i$ in parallel with
$R_{out}$ and $C_{load}$. If we do KCL in this circuit, the sum of current
in the three branches is equal to zero. We know $i = C\pderiv{V}{t}$, and
as Master Heaviside teaches us, derivatives are just rotations by ninety
degrees. Thus our current is $C\pderiv{V}{t} \equiv j\omega CV$; since we
get tired of writing $j\omega$ all the time, we call this $sCV$.

So we have $R_{cc}$ @ $V_0$. Our transfer function, remember, is $H(\omega)
= \frac{V_o}{V_i} = \frac{-G_m}{\frac{1}{R_{out} + sC_{load}}} = \frac{-G_m
R_{out}}{1 + sR_{out}C_{load}}$.

So we've got several cases for $\abs{H(j\omega)} = \abs{\frac{-G_m R_{out}}
{1 + j\omega R_{out} C_{load}}}$: either $\omega \ll \frac{1}{R_{out}
C_{load}}$, in which case it's just $G_m R_{out}$; or $\omega = \frac{1}
{R_{out}C_{load}}$, in which case it's roughly divided by $\sqrt{2}$; or
$\omega \gg \frac{1} {R_{out}C_{load}}$, in which case it's just $\frac{
G_m}{\omega C_{load}}$.

Unity gain frequency (i.e. $\abs{H(j\omega_u)} = 1$)? $\omega_u = \frac{G_m
}{C_{load}}$. This bottom one, this is basically just $G_m Z_{cap}$, which
happens to also be the unity-gain frequency. So the gain above that point
just happens to be $\frac{\omega_u}{\omega}$

The fun thing about EE is that you get to work with systems that span many
many decades of frequencies.

Four simple formulas for single-pole systems:

$$
A_{v,0} = A_v = \abs{H(j\omega)} = G_m R_{out}
\\ \omega_p = \frac{1}{R_{out} C_{load}}
\\ \omega_u = \frac{G_m}{C_{load}}
\\ \omega_u = A_{v,0}\omega_p
$$

So once we've got $\omega_u$ and $A_{v,0}$, we can get $\omega_p$. If we
know the pole frequency and the load, we know that $G_m = \omega_u
C_{load}$. We can find everything given just a handful of values.

$G_m = \frac{I_c}{V_T} = \frac{1 \mu A}{26 mV}$. Now if I said 1 nA, no
way.

Plots of magnitude for single-pole systems. Got to be able to draw this in
sleep by the time you take midterm (roughly constant at $A_{v,0}$ until
$\omega_p$; drops off linearly and hits 1 at $\omega_u$.

Trading off DC gain for low-frequency gain accuracy.

So what happens if we increase $R_o$? DC gain goes up, poles frequency goes
down, and nothing happens at unity gain frequency.

And if we increase $C_{load}$? We shift the graph to the left. Generally
bad -- all things being equal, you'd like to have as much bandwidth as
possible. Also, increasing $R_o$ is good.

The last parameter we get to control is $G_m$. Note that there's no effect
on $\omega_p$. It just lifts the curve up directly. This is a great
thing. However, the problem is that it costs you power.

All right. All right. So that's single-pole systems. Very simple, but very
important.

So let's go back to the transient response. We haven't talked about phase
yet. So how do we calculate the angle of $H(j\omega)$? When $\omega \ll
\omega_p$, then our phase is effectively $\pi$ (assume that sign of $G_m$
is positive).

When $\omega \gg \omega_p$, what happens? We get a $\frac{\pi}{2}$: in the
denominator, the second term dominates, so this is roughly $\frac{-1}{j} =
j$.

How do we get there? When $\omega = \omega_p$, we get roughly $\frac{3\pi}
{4}$.

Consider: all we're doing is increasing the imaginary component relative to
the real component (which is negative!), so this certainly goes through the
motions and hits $\infty$ when we reach $\theta \equiv \frac{\pi}{2}$.

Problem: radians vs degrees; wraparound; modulo 360 or $2\pi$. If you're
caring about phase, you're probably talking about stability.

You all know how to draw the phase; the interval spanning from one decade
before to one decade after $\omega_p$ defines our linear region.

For Bode plot, straight line approximation; fine. However, accuracy demands
that we consider the actual numerical values (not going to be drawn): just
examine the unit circle and reference triangles, and use small signal
approximation.
