EE 105: Devices & Circuits
==========================
Wednesday, March 21, 2012
-------------------------

Midterm Friday; OBONNS.

Today: Graphing and calculating $G_m$, $R_o$, $A_v$, keep talking about
frequency response.

Graphings
=========
So, the thing to do: you know you're going to have (if I've got
some $A_0\sin(\omega t) \mapsto \abs{H(j\omega)}A_0\sin(\omega t + \angle
H(\omega))$. If I give you a plot of angle or frequency, one way or
another, you've got to find the angle of $H(j\omega)$. Also, find max/min
voltages (determined by gain at various stages). Should make sure that those
points are marked (circled, even) so Pister can see that we know what's up.

If it's greater than 0, it's called **"phase lead"**. You want to find and
label and mark zero-crossings and min/max in time (which is really in
phase). Points move *left*.

If it's less than 0, it's called **"phase lag"**, and points move right.

Calculating $G_m$, $R_o$
========================

There have been some questions about this on Piazza. There's the basics,
like when you're looking into a collector or a drain, you're going to see
$r_o$; when you're looking into an emitter or a source, and the
collector/drain are at some AC ground, you're going to see $\frac{1}{g_m}$,
and then there's the blocks that you know and ought to recognize/use in
circuits, which are: what happens if I have some emitter degeneration or
some source degeneration ($G_m \equiv \frac{g_m}{1 + g_m R_s}$ for MOS,
$R_s \equiv R_E \parallel r_\pi$); if I'm looking into the source/emitter,
then this looks like $\frac{1}{g_m}\parens{1 + \frac{R_D}{r_o}}$. Note that
for a BJT, you have $r_\pi$ in parallel with this whole thing.

For example: steps for finding gain: $A_v = -G_m R_o$. In general, this is
how you'll find gain. $G_m = \frac{I_o}{V_i}\bigg|_{v_i=0}$. Straight
taylor approximation: this is why we set $V_o = 0$ when calculating $G_m$
and $V_i = 0$ when calculating $R_o$.

When doing $G_m$ calculation, we just don't care about anything above the
junction.

Mentally, what people like Razavi do is say "aha! I've got a bias voltage
on that gate; this thing now is one of my basic elements! Aha! I've got a
$\frac{1}{g_m}$ to ground, and now I can draw my small signal model." And
so the current coming out is roughly $g_m v_i$. The only time you look up
is if there's a current source up there that depends on one of the lower
node voltages.

The reason why we call it $g_m$ is because it's **mutual**
transconductance.

So now we're not so sure. What I see is $\frac{1}{g_m}\parens{1 + \frac{1 /
g_m}{r_o}}$ when looking into source.

So now we've figured out what our $g_m v_i$ is. Current dividers.

So I wanted to do a couple more examples. For example, source follower
(recall, measure output at source). We know $A_v = -G_m R_o$. So what is
$R_o$? It's $\frac{1}{g_m} \parallel R_s$. $G_m$ is a little tricky. Draw
the small signal model, then do KCL at the output node. Note that since
we're grounding $v_s$, $v_{gs} = v_i$, and no current is flowing through
the source resistance (or the output resistance, even!). Thus $G_m \equiv
-g_m$. What does this mean? We're shoving current out, instead of shoving
current in.

So finally $A_v = -G_m R_o = \frac{g_m R_s}{1 + g_m R_s}$. And in
particular, in a MOS, it's very common that you'd see the output between
two MOSFETs, so you'd get something like $\frac{g_m r_o}{1 + g_m r_o}$. If
you're lucky, this looks something like $0.9 - 0.999$.

All right. So here's a couple of good ones to think about. (various
practice circuits)
