EE 105: Devices & Circuits
==========================
Monday, April 2, 2012
---------------------

Spice files for the lab, etc.

The lab is a high-gain bipolar amplifier with a PMOS load on it. Two ways
to do this. When we learn about intrinsic impedances, we see why we put the
cascode in the common gate thingy.

$A_v = -G_m R_o$. $G_m = g_{m4}$, and $R_o = r_{o1a} \parallel
r_{o3}\parens{1 + g_m(r_{o4} \parallel r_{\pi 3})}$. $r_{o4} \gg r_\pi
\implies r_{o4} \parallel r_\pi \approx r_\pi$.

Our output is just $r_{o1a}$. So now we know that our gain is $-g_{m4}
r_{o1a}$, or roughly $-\frac{V_A}{V_T} \sim -1000$.

Comments on how low frequencies might be more difficult to measure --
gain too great.

Result on frequency response? I've got $g_m$, $R_o$, and $C_L$. Now I'm
taking that from $20k \to 2M$. Other than that, my single-pole system is
the same.

How to bias? The answer is almost feedback. In general, when you have an
amplifier like this, you have some big high-gain region. If you can figure
out a way to put a resistor around this thing and set the input equal to
the input at $V_c$, then it self-biases and the thing operates around that
point. For MOS, that works great. For bipolar, we've got this huge output
impedance, so we need to make our feedback resistor large.

Gain is now $-\frac{R_f}{R_{in}}$, which is made of ratio of passive
components, which means you can make a very accurate gain. Very insensitive
to PVT variation. Unity-gain frequency stays the same, and it keeps a nice
constant gain over a very large bandwidth. Turns out, also causes problems
with stability. There might actually be a little bump, and that could turn
your amplifier into an oscillator.

Why is the second transistor in there? Not for the 2x gain. Rather, it's to
reduce the base-collector voltage. You get something called Miller
multiplication.

Intrinsic capacitance. Intrinsic to the thing that makes BJTs work is the
PN-junction. Fundamentally, these things have two capacitors that you
cannot get away from. For historical reasons, the base-collector junction
capacitance is $C_\mu$, and the base-emitter junction capacitance is
$C_\pi$. For the MOSFET, intrinsic to the operation of this device is
having a gate that induces a charge in a channel. Cannot make a MOSFET
without making this capacitor. We've got $C_{ox}$, which is in terms of
$F/m^2$. We have charge $Q = WLC_{ox}(V_{GS} - V_{th})$. We don't need any
charge in there until we cross this threshold, and above that, it looks
linear (ramp).

So in the linear region, you've got that the source and drain are roughly
the same voltage. So you end up with $C_{gs} \approx C_{gd} \approx
\frac{1}{2} WL C_{ox}$. Intrinsically, changing the gate has negligible
effect. $C_{gs} = \frac{2}{3} WL C_{ox}$ and $C_{gd} = 0$ intrinsically: no
matter what you do, you cannot get away from this. The $2/3$ is because
this is not uniform: it has some shape.

There are also extrinsic capacitances which are overlap. Looking at the
field lines, there's an overlap capacitance. Overlap multiplied by
width. $C^\prime_{gd} = WC^\prime_{ox}$
