EE 105: Devices & Circuits
==========================
Wednesday, April 4, 2012
------------------------
Why we like to use active loads: give us nice flat voltage regions, as
opposed to passive loads.

So now we have two currents for two devices. If I tie them together, then
the magnitudes have to equal each other. The only place this happens is
where the two curves cross.

What else: biasing, gain figure. Miller. Feedback.

Miller capacitance
------------------

Suppose I have an amplifier with gain A from $v_i to v_o$. Small signal, so
$v_o = Av_i$. If I measure a current across some impedance, we know $v =
iZ$. What's going to happen if I plug that same impedance Z between the
input and output of the amplifier?

We'll have some $i_i$, and across this Z, I have $v_i$ on one side, and
$Av_i$ on the other side. So I get $v_i - Av_i = i_i Z$, so $Z_{in} =
\frac{v_i}{i_i} = \frac{Z}{1 - A}$. So that means in particular that if you
do something like this (where the magnitude of the gain is approximately a
million), what's the input impedance I see? Roughly a millionth of what it
would be. A $M\Omega$ resistor therefore starts looking like a single
ohm. The idea is that if I raise this up a little bit, a ton more scurrent
is flowing through it than it looks.

Also see gains close to 1: impedance gets very large. So what happens if
I've got a capacitor across an amplifier? $Z_{in} = \frac{\frac{1}{sC}}{1-A}
= \frac{1}{sC(1-A)} = \frac{1}{sC_{miller}}$. Therefore $C_{miller} =
(1-A)C$. This is known as Miller multiplication.

So let's look at a bipolar transistor and think about what the input
capacitance looks like if I've got an ideal current source load on
it. Recall this has two junctions in it ($C_{je,0}, C_{jc,0}$, which you
know how to calculate from area and doping like you did on midterm 1),
which are _very_ dependent on bias. For the 2N3904, the zero-bias values
look like $4\text{pF}, 8\text{pF}$. In the model, under bias, these get
called $C_\mu, C_\pi$. $C_\mu = \frac{C_{jc,0}}{\sqrt{1 - \frac{V_{BE}}
{V_{0, CE}}}}$, $C_\pi = \frac{C_{j,e,0}}{\sqrt{1 - \frac{V_{BE}}{V_{D,
BE}}}}$.

$A_v = -G_m R_o = -\frac{V_A}{V_T} \sim -1000$. So $C_{jn} = C_\pi +
(1-A) C_\mu \approx 25 pF + (1 + 1000) 2pF \approx 2 nF$.

Similarly, for the MOS, $C_{gs} \approx 300 fF, C_{gd} \approx 100
fF$. Taking $\lambda = 0.1, V_{D,SAT} = 0.4V$, what do we get? $C_{in} =
C_{gs} + (1 - A) C_{gd}$; $A = -g_m r_o = -\frac{2}{\lambda V_{DSAT}} =
-50$. So my input capacitance is $300 fF + 5100 fF = 5400 fF$. These
capacitances start adding more poles.

(possibility of negative capacitance?)
