EE 105: Devices & Circuits
==========================
Friday, April 6, 2012
---------------------

CMOS inverter (how to make inverter versus how to make oscillator),
frequency response, feedback, oscillation

Miller gain, with an effective input impedance. In general, some $Z_{eff} =
\frac{Z}{1-A}$. Turns voltage amplifier into a transconductance
amplifier. The gain of this amplifier is just this $R_F$.

Last time. Talked about $C_{gd}, C_{\mu}$, if you've got an amplifier where
you've got high gain, you end up with a lot of input capacitance. Even
though this may be much smaller than parasitic capacitor to ground, may
still dominate. Often, Miller effect is bad. Some cases where you do like
it.

For example, suppose you've got a source follower. As long as it's a good
source follower, we can make the effective capacitance much smaller. Also
lowers output impedance.

Let's do an example with bipolar (as was the case in the lab). There's a
basic amplifier, and let's say we're trying to design something where we've
got some kind of a sensor as our source. Has a very high source
impedance. Stick into amplifier, shoot for gain on the order of 1000. Must
drive 10 pF on the other side.

WIth inverting amplifier, at low frequency, we have a phase shift of 180,
pick up phase of 90 from one decade before to one decade after. When
measuring, you find a much smaller value. Why? (Miller multiplication of
$C_\mu$)

For a gain of 400, $C_{in} = 25p + 800p = 825p$. So $\omega_{p,in} =
\frac{1}{R_s C_{in}} \approx 10^3 rad/sec$. Instead of getting this nice
Bode plot I thought I was going to get, it dies off much earlier.

Once again, inserting components for reduction of input capacitance by an
order of magnitude. Doubled gain is just an added bonus.

What would we have done to deal with this problem before midterm 2? We
would have bolted on another stage: follower (buffer). Gain is basically 1,
so Miller multiplication makes $C_\mu$ of the follower go away.

CMOS
----
Suppose I tie the gates of an NMOS and a PMOS together. Consider small
signal model. Completely symmetric: once you draw the same small signal
model, you can't tell which was which. $G_m = g_{m1} + g_{m2}$. $A_v =
-(g_{m1} + g_{m2})(r_{o1} \parallel r_{o2})$. And if I just have some
capacitive loading on the output ($C_L$), and I get my classic single-pole
picture. This is an inverter. If I put in a low voltage, PMOS pulls voltage
high; if I put in a high voltage, NMOS pulls voltage low.

You'll build one of these and measure the Bode plot, and then we'll put
three of them in series (with explicit 100pF capacitance on output of each
one). We'll find that we've got a gain of something like -1000. Very
difficult to bias, so we'll try the same trick that we did in the last lab:
we put a feedback resistor on there and put an input and voltage source,
and you'll find that you get a nice, easy-to-bias, reliable-gain
amplifier. And gain is $-\frac{R_F}{R_i}$. Amplifier. It works nicely.

And then you'll show this to one of your friends in EE141 or CS150, and in
those classes, they'll note that you're working on ring oscillators in
EE105. it's well-known that if you daisy-chain three of them, you get a
3-stage ring oscillator. So how can this be an oscillator and an amplifier?
Very subtle.

The challenge is to make sure that you understand the math that governs
which way this goes.

So: what's going on there? If we look at the Bode plot for the 3-stage
amplifier, assuming they all have the same load, three of them in series,
gain of something like $A_0^3 = 10^4$, right at that frequency, my gain
drops off very quickly: $\frac{1}{\omega^3}$, gain of -3 on a log-log
plot. It's a third-degree pole. Phase-wise, what happens? Tripled slope in
the region, so goes from 0 to 270 in that time.

At 10x the pole frequency, we still have a magnitude of gain of
$10$. Important: we also know that at some frequency less than that, our
phase crosses 360. Think of this as a black box: if I put in a sine wave on
one side, I'll get a sine wave on the other side. We know that at that
frequency, we get exactly zero phase shift, and it comes out with some
amplitude more than 10x what we input.

If ever $\abs{H(j\omega_{360})} > 1$ (for any value of $\omega_{360}$),
then it will oscillate. Otherwise, it will be an amplifier. How to fix? I
have resistors, capacitors; if I can push one of these poles further left
so that I can get a gain less than 1, then the sine wave goes in and gets a
little smaller, so the system is stable. And then you can use this as an
amplifier.
