EE 105: Devices & Circuits
==========================
Monday, April 9, 2012
---------------------
CMOS amps. Ways to draw PMOS, NMOS. (analog way: PMOS on top, NMOS on
bottom (source = bulk); LTSpice puts the two together. Way to remember:
always PN-junction). Always looks like a diode. If you're a digital person,
you draw transistors with a NOT (bubble) on the gate of the PMOS. LTSpice's
way is the most faithful: analog way could be wrong, since it really
depends on which way the current's flowing.

So given those devices, on your homework I ask you to draw explicitly
(using the bubbles). You get an I/O relationship that has two flat regions
on it. When within threshold region, it's just plain off; in between, I get
two quadratics, and in between, I get a high-gain region. If we draw five
different regions of operation of this thing, if we look at the P and the N
current in each one:

When $0 < V_{in} < V_{th,N}$, the PMOS device has almost all the $V_{DD}$
across it. It's going to go into saturation pretty close to the top
rail. Very little saturation there; almost all triode region. N current is
just identically zero.

In the next region, $V_{th,N} < V_{in} < ?$, N is in saturation now, and P
is still in triode.

Then, at some point, both devices are in saturation, intersection point
in there, and that is our high gain region. Not perfectly straight, but
pretty darn straight. Both curves moving as $g_m v_{in}$.

Next, the NMOS device goes up to even higher current, PMOS goes to lower
current, NMOS in triode, PMOS saturated.

Finally, PMOS is just off, NMOS is in triode.

For homework, must calculate what these transition points are. Pretty
straightforward to calculate: for ALD1106 and ALD1107, $\mu_n C_{ox}
\approx 40 \mu A/V^2, \mu_p C_{ox} \approx 16 \mu A/V^2$. So if you want to
find $V_{in}$ s.t. $V_{out} = V_{DD}/2 = 2.5V$, the two currents have to be
equal to each other, so $I_{DN} = I_{DP}$, so $\mu_n C_{ox}(V_{in} -
V_{th})^2 = \mu_p C_{ox}(V_{DD} - V_{in} - \abs{V_{th,p}})$. You can solve,
and you get something around $2V$. That's going to tell you how to get to
that point.

So how do you figure out what the input and output swing is where both
devices stay in saturation? Pretty straightforward with the picture: you
know it goes into saturation at $V_{in} - V_{th}$ for the NMOS, and
similarly, for the PMOS device, this is going to be $V_{DD} -
\abs{V_{th}}$. These tell you exactly what your output swing is, so once
you know this, you can calculate how high/low it can go until a transistor
drops out of saturation; divide by gain, and you have your input.

Managed to get Excel to plot these things.

A, H: open loop gain (once through main amp). Then, feedback factor K: will
often see as F. If you're a control theorist, you'll draw some sort of
summing junction. If you go around this loop once (break or open loop) and
look at the gain once through the amplifier and feedback, then that (AK) is
called the loop gain.

So what is the overall gain of a system with feedback? For the gain
(closed-loop gain) we get $y = Ae$, $e = x - Ky$. When we combine these, we
get $y = Ax - AKy$, or $\frac{y}{x} = \frac{A}{1 + AK} = \frac{A}{AK
\parens{1 + \frac{1}{AK}}} = \frac{1}{K}\frac{1}{1 + \frac{1}{AK}} \approx
\frac{1}{K}\parens{1 - \frac{1}{AK}}$. So that's good news. We get to take
our amplifier, which we're building out of transistors.

Closest thing that you can make (that control theorists like to see) is an
opamp -- darn good approximation. If you take 140, you take what you've
learned in 105 and learn to design opamps. But you already know some
circuits that look pretty opamp-like.

In datasheets: $A_v(V_+ - V_- + V_{offset})$. Important thing that'll show
up early.

So: in your lab, you built a bunch of CMOS inverters; calculate input
capacitance. Couple of polarized capacitors. Pretty subtle. Explicitly
place 100pF so we don't have to worry about the subtleties. So let's say
the gain of each stage is 10, that'll make a nice ring oscillator. So what
is the open-loop gain, feedback factor, loop gain of this? Feedback gain is
1, open-loop gain is -1000. So loop gain is -1000. People tend to drop
minus signs.

Proper place to break feedback loop: right in front of each amplifier
(since we explicitly drew load capacitors).

Response of closed-loop gain to frequency.

Very quickly: single-pole system. $A = \frac{A_0}{1 + \frac{s}{\omega_p}}$,
so $\frac{V}{X} = \frac{A}{1 + AK} = \frac{A_0}{1 + \frac{s}{\omega_p} +
A_0K}$. Put this back into original form, etc. Pole moves. With feedback,
pole moved to higher frequency.
