EE 105: Devices & Circuits
==========================
Wednesday, April 11, 2012
-------------------------

Feedback:
---------
* Math
* circuits poles move
* stability and amplitudes

Nice mathematical abstraction of feedback with an amplifier with open-loop
gain given by A, and a feedback factor K, and loop gain AK. If we close the
loop, then we know that we get a closed-loop gain of $\frac{A}{1+AK}$. For
$\abs{AK} \gg 1$, this is approximately $\frac{1}{K}\parens{1 -
\frac{1}{AK}}$.

Turns out same analysis we do for amplifiers is the same we need to do for
oscillators. Circuits don't quite match this.

So let's do a little math, and example where I mess up and am too busy
thinking about the beautiful math. Single-pole amplifier with $A(s) =
\frac{A_o}{1 + s/\omega_{p0}}$. CLG is $\frac{A}{1 + AK} = \frac{A_0}{1 +
A_0 K + s/\omega_{p0}} = \frac{A_0}{1 + A_0 K} \frac{1}{1 + s /
\omega_{p,cl}}$. DC gain is the same, and then we've got some
frequency-dependent component. So we have $\omega_{p,cl} = (1 + A_0
K)\omega_{p0}$. Pole has moved: depends on how much feedback we provide. In
particular, if the amount of feedback I put into this thing is 0, then I
get the right answer.

So if we look at (the magnitude of) the open-loop transfer function, we
have this $\omega_{u0} = A_0 \omega_{p0}$. And now, as I add feedback, this
should not move.

Mathematically, as we change the loop, unity gain does not change.

We know from Miller that we can write the equivalent linear circuit with
input and output loads.

Calculate $G_m, R_o$ the usual way (small signal model). Math ran into real
world: taking last lab into account, unity gain frequency moved. Mistaken
assumption was that the resistor impedance stays small at all
frequencies. Impedance goes up with frequency, and all of a sudden, $r_\pi$
is not negligible any more. Initially 7k, and I'm driving a 7k with a 100k
resistor. cut effective $G_m$.

Now let's look at your next lab, where we'll build a ring
oscillator. Feeding back to the input and trying to turn this thing into an
amplifier. Put a 100k resistor in the loop, each stage has an explicit
100pF capacitance on the input. Start with $R_{fb} = 0$, put load on this
capacitance. Then we can figure stuff out from $V_{in}$ to $V_{fb}$.

We're going to get three frequencies out of these. Initially they're
identical, and we're going to get an open-loop gain $A = \parens{\frac{G_m
R_o}{1 + s/\omega_{p1}}}^3$. All the poles line up at the same place.

Gets bigger each loop until saturation. Mathematical criteria for
stability: $\abs{H(j\omega)} < 1, \angle H(j\omega) = 0$. Phase margin:
$\angle H(j\omega)$. If that's 360, we're doomed. $360 - \angle H(j\omega)$
tells you how close to instability you are. Then there's gain margin, which
is $H(j\omega_{360})/1$. People get very nervous when your phase margin is
less than $45^\circ$. So this thing is going to oscillate, and that's what
you found. (when phase margin dips below 0, you oscillate)

So how to keep this an oscillator? (generally used for clocks; stick
through handful of inverters afterward and measure that final output)
Current source: have some reference current with resistor up to rail
(setting ref. voltage), and now you have some transistors whose drains are
all tied together and have particular values of $W/L$. We control the bias
voltage with more MOSFETs or whatever. Lots of advice to take 142 and
stuff.

system absolutely unstable, etc. How do we guarantee small gain? Get rid of
poles or stuff. Single inverter will not oscillate. Not enough poles to get
you to 360.
