EE 105: Devices & Circuits
==========================
Monday, April 16, 2012
----------------------
Lab,

slew rate: trying to drive an $8\Omega$ speaker. Probably want to drive
this with a DC-block capacitor. In systems like this, you generally want
AC-coupling so you don't have to worry how things are inserted. You also
want this to work for audio. C should be blocking. 20Hz. For lab, only have
to go down to 1kHz. May use 10 or 100 $\mu F$. Why is this bad? Output
stage is a cascode (sort of) with capacitive load.

If you've got a sine wave on this thing at some DC offset of 1-5V, you know
that what you'd like to see is the output tracking the input with a diode
drop. In fact, that works fine for low amplitudes at low frequencies.

But at high amplitudes / frequency, what you see is this thing called the
slew rate (looks like capacitor action). What's happening? Current flowing
across this capacitor is equal to $C\omega V_0 \cos(\omega t)$. The
magnitude of the current is simply $\omega C V_0$. If f is 160 Hz and C is
1 $\mu F$, then $\omega = 10^3$, $\omega C = 10^{-3}$, so you're going to
get 1 mA of current that you need at the peaks of these sine waves. But if
you take this up to $f = 1 kHz, C = 10 \mu F$, you'll need $60 mA$. etc.

What you see on the scope is that output tracks just fine on the way
up. No problems with emitter follower transistor. On its way up, if this
voltage is lagging, it only takes 60 mV to give 10x the current. More than
happy to source extra current. But once you hit the peak, current coming
down, and you need to discharge capacitor with that current. And that's why
with this setup you end up with a slew rate $\deriv{V}{t}\Big|_{max} =
\frac{I_{bias}}{C}$.

Bunch of tricks people have come up with over the years. Problem here is
that we have a hard time pulling down. So what if we make a CE or CC with a
PNP transistor? On the negative-going transitions, this thing will happily
pull much more current. But it'll have problems with the positive-going.

So combine the two, make an NPN follower to bring this voltage up and a PNP
follower to bring this voltage down. Tie these together, and this is our
$V_{in}$. Challenge: if you look at $I_{out}$ vs. $V_{in} - V_{out}$, you
know that we have a dead zone of two diode drops, i.e. when these things
turn on/off. SO what do we want to do to fix this?

Ideally you put a battery in there that biases these two bases far enough
apart that they're always on. How do you do that? Turns out, lots of other
ways to do a voltage source.

Simplest: just put two diodes in there. Trying to compensate for the diode
drops. Want some current flowing through, so just put a resistor before the
diodes. Conceptually, this will do. Could put input anywhere, really, and
the output really would track the input.

This is one of the problems with the lab: driving low impedance with
output. Driving high-impedance source. If this were actual electret, this
would have huge impedance. But inside this can, there's already a JFET to
lower the impedance.

Two issues: slew rate; impedance is basically 8$\Omega$. Somehow you've got
to get from k$\Omega$s to $\Omega$s. Put in a follower. Key: understand
what you're adding and why. Perfectly fine as well as you get reasonable
performance. Hand calculations match spice calculations match
measurements.

One thing you might put in there is another CC, which magnifies impedance
by that $1+\beta$ factor. Darlington pair.

As always, at the input to the amplifier, we have a magical subtracter box
for now.  We'll eventually show how to make this with transistors
(differential pairs).

Unity-gain feedback can be used to manipulate what an output impedance
looks like. Should not be a surprise: we already knew this because we knew
that with that same configuration where we had some load capacitance, we
got a system with an open-loop gain at 0 and a pole at $\frac{1}{R_o
C_L}$. When we wrap feedback around it, this moves to $\omega_{p,cl} = (1 +
A_0 K)\omega_{p,ol}$.

So that's a very good thing: for a voltage amplifier, feedback lowers your
output impedance, potentially dramatically.

So how about the input impedance? This is a little trickier in that it's
doing some handwaving regarding how the feedback actually happens.

Want to get high gain because you can always trade it for good things in
circuits: low stable gain, etc. The only caveat is that this is a real
amplifier, so there's only so much swing you can get.

Magical subtracter box! We'd like $V_D = V_+ - V_-$. If they're both going
up and down together, we'd like nothing to happen.

Works because of linearization around our operating point.

Take current and turn into voltage by putting in resistors. And now you've
got a differential voltage across here.

Similar to common emitter: how is this different? the change on either side
will set the other rail. Another way to look at this: we're rejecting the
average.
