EE 105: Devices & Circuits
==========================
Wednesday, April 18, 2012
-------------------------

Output impedance, slew rate. Feedbacks, op amps, digital.

From lab: trying to derive load with resistive component, passive
component. Bunch of issues here: R is small (8 ohm), output resistance much
smaller than load resistance means burn current.

Current limits: $I = \omega C V_{swing}$. Pick C such that impedance small
compared to R.

cleverness. Cleverness in short supply. Nice to have ability to just throw
op amps at problems instead of cleverness.

What if we had some way to measure output voltage and compare to input
voltage and use to affect bias voltage on transistor? Would be nice if
we could somehow measure output voltage relative to input, gain it up
(positive) and apply to $V_{BE1}$.

Turns out: negative feedback. Doesn't fit nicely into picture we like of
summing junction, etc, but it turns out most circuit feedback doesn't (at
transistor level). If you take 140, you learn what true pain is. Until you
start using op amps. Which is an abstraction.

Something that lets me drive with small current in small-signal
model.

Still have problem slewing north, but slewing south is fine. Before we had
the opposite problem.

Turns out when you're slewing, linearity of drive not good; going to sound
distorted. 

More talk about feedback.

Op amps!

Last time we learned about differential amplifiers. Now we'll put that to
use. There's no precise definition of what an op amp is. But roughly, there
are three parts: differential amplifier (where the goal is to separate the
common mode from the difference of the signal), gain stage, and maybe an
output stage. Sometimes you see amplfiiers drawn as trapezoids, which just
means that it's missing the output stage: could be very large output
impedance.
