EE 105: Devices & Circuits
==========================
Monday, April 23, 2012
----------------------
Operational amps; oscillated at 800Hz in speaker-to-microphone
feedback. Ideal op amp: is differential amplifier with gain. Infinite input
impedance, no output impedance, etc. Doesn't care where output goes; no
current limits. All things that real op amps don't share with ideal op
amps. We're not going to get into the details of designing op amps, but
it's a nice circuit: uses things you've learned all semester
long. Relatively easy to make and buy.

If we look at the simplest op amp, you have to have a differential pair,
and you have to have some sort of current flowing through that differential
pair. We know from last lecture if the common mode voltage is the same, as
they move up and down, the emitter moves up and down. Depending on the
resistor, your current stays relatively constant. So this gives us some
common-mode rejection. Slight changes of this (if you draw the SSM) --
virtual ground. You get a differential current (one side is +, other is
-). Keeping current constant. Simplest way to turn this into a voltage is
to make it single-sided, and that is an op amp.

So how do we find the gain? We have to find the operating point. For this
particular circuit, we need to know what the inputs are at. Our operating
point, therefore, is one $V_{BE}$ drop below the DC bias at 0. Tail
resistance. Named by people doing tubes. Tail current: $\frac{V_{EE} -
V_{BE} - V_{cm}}{R_{tail}}$. So $g_{m1}$ is $\frac{I_c}{V_T}$. $R_{out}
\approx R_c$, and $G_m$ ends up being $\frac{g_{m1}}{2}$.

Gain ends up being around 50.

So this thing actually does work as an op amp. If I wanted to make a
follower or unity-gain buffer out of it,

Stability? Depends on gain at $\omega_{360}$. If there is no
$\omega_{360}$, then we don't have to worry about this. This particular
case is a single-pole system (to a good approximation).

Traditional thing to do in tube amplifiers: -500V (really big volts).

This ends up getting an output impedance of about 200 ohms, which is not
ideal, but still better than 10k.

So let's add a second stage.

Reduces gain, but eh. Usually see follower.

Small signal does poor job approximating: well out of region of approximation.

Let's suppose we have an amplifier, and we put it in feedback. Assume gain
is 1000, output resistance is just $R_c = 1k$. This stuff here is all about
creating K, the feedback factor. So open-loop, this is $K=0$. AK is about
10, so closed-loop gain is about 90, output resistance is about 100. If K
is 0.1, closed-loop gain is about 10, output resistance is about 1.

Unity-gain frequency, closed-loop gain is about 1, output resistance is
about 1.

$A_{CL} \approx \frac{1}{K}$, $R_o \approx \frac{R_{out}{1 + A_0 K}$.

So this can drive a speaker pretty well. So what does it look like when
it's driving it? Fine for small signals. If you think about that output
stage, drawing just part of this, with no bias on the input, and I've got
my feedback, then it turns out the way this thing is set up is such that I
get an output bias of a couple of volts. Pretty close to zero. With no
input, I'm going to have something like 6 mA flowing.

Talk about slew. Can slew fast in positive direction, but in negative
direction, stuck with bias current through $R_C$.

That's why the next step is to take that amplifier that we have and have it
drive two emitter followers.
