EE 105: Devices & Circuits
==========================
Wednesday, April 25, 2012
-------------------------

Next week: lecture is just going to be review, examples, Q&A. If we run out
of Q's or A's, we'll quit. Comprehensive final. Stuff certainly on
capacitance versus applied voltage.

Will be a homework next week to throw in all the things we haven't had
homework on.

Not an op amp class, so all we need to know is that they're made of common
emitters and common collectors and things like that. Might do some good to
see that people design real products using these tools that we now know.

Some stuff quite subtle and not covered at all.

3T, 5T op-amp. On some problems, we lost half of our transconductance. Lose
gain $R_1 \parallel r_{\pi3}$ (not a big deal yet, but will be an issue
when we add a current source) -- costs us a factor of 2 for now. Bias
currents depend on common mode (CM) input and output voltage and supply.

On the output stage, there's a very nasty deadband on the output, and
there's no over current protection on the output. On the LM324, they made
the output stage even worse: got current source -- NPN common emitter stuck
into PNP and also an NPN with a Darlington on the NPN. The problem over
here is that if the output is at 0, we've got a range of _three_ diode
drops that does nothing. Quad op amp. Power, ground, plus, minus for 4 op
amps. Nine cents in volume.

One interesting thing on this guy: they've got a current source feeding the
gate of the Darlington pair (100 uA), so they've got $\beta^2$. If my input
goes low, then all the current is going to flow through the Darlington pair
and get multiplied by $\beta^2$. Huge amount of current dropping across big
voltage. (potentially at 30V). Literally can destroy transistors.

So what do you do to stop that? Very common they'll put in a sense
resistor, so now you have a voltage proportional to the current flowing
through the output, and so if the current gets too high, I steal some of
the output current.

Thermal runaway: $I_c \propto I_s(\tau)$, more or less.

$\beta$-helper: try to minimize current being stolen from $I_{ref}$. Going
to have to have $I_B$ flowing into the node. Therefore current flowing that
way is $\frac{NI_B}{\beta}$, which is basically nothing.

Can turn any one of these and turn into a source by just mirroring it:
diode connect a transistor on the other end so it has a current of
$I_{ref}$, and I just do the same thing.

MOS case. Now we don't need a $\beta$-helper because we don't have a
current. Multiple copies, mostly same thing. Except now you change the
$\frac{W}{L}$ (as opposed to area). Don't want to change $L$, since that's
coupled to nonlinear device behavior.

We normally lose half of our $g_m$

What I really want is a current mirror. If I put in a PNP current mirror
and mirror one side's current over to the other side, now I recover my
original current, _and_ this thing self-biases. Standard 2-stage op amp.

Got a differential pair that gives you a current proportional to difference
between two signals, stick that into an active load current mirror, and now
this thing has very high gain (as long as the next stage has high
gain). Stick that into a common-emitter amplifier to get another gain
stage, and maybe you put some gain after it. These are driven by current
sources (which we know how to make -- diode-connected transistor and a
resistor), and that is your classic two-stage op amp.

Works with MOS as well: differential input stage, current mirror as a load,
and common source gain stage. Both of these want current sources as loads.

The nice thing about both of these is that you just wire them up and they
work. Might not work well (point of 140).

Miller effect helps. Pole-splitting, beautiful thing. Outside of the scope
of this class. So that's it for op amps.
