EE 105: Devices & Circuits
==========================
Wednesday, January 25, 2012.
----------------------------

Oscilloscope:
 * Frequency
 * Amplitude / scale
 * DC offset
 * Trigger

DO NOT PRESS [ autoscale ]. Nobody who knows how to use an oscilloscope
uses autoscale.

Built-in potential V₀
======================

High-level: why are we studying PN-junction? It's central to every
semiconductor device we have. NPN-junction, MOSFET. Basically same thing,
but one new thing. Field-effect.

Everything you need to know about these devices aside from field-effect is
in the PN-junction.

From last time, if we have a junction, there are more N-type carriers on
the N side, and vice versa. Concentration profiles look like Nd ≈ 10¹⁷,
peak concentration of other carriers is much less. Reversed on the P side.

Huge gradient from N-type carriers, so they want to flow. However, they
leave behind a difference in electric charge – electric potential
generated, so we have a resulting electric field (E = -∇V).

In order to have charge neutrality, we have to have that drift and
diffusion current cancel each other out perfectly. True for both carrier
types and on both sides. True everywhere. Can't be net charge flow in
equilibrium.

In terms of concentration, we have gradients. Something happens; we don't
know the actual shape.

So... If we assume that this is an abrupt junction (so, as fabricated,
there is a uniform concentration of N on one side, uniform concentration of
P on the other side – NOT the way real world is; doping is graded),
J{drift} = -J{diffusion} for hole currents, qpμ{p}E = qD{p}∇p. Now talking
about number of carriers vs. number of coulombs. E = -∇V, so we can make
this substitution to eliminate E. Using the Einstein relation, we get that
V(x₂) - V(x₁) = (D{p}/μ{p})ln(p(x₂)/p(x₁). Therefore: V{D} = (k{B}T/q)
ln(N{A}N{D}/n{i}²). This is the built-in potential.

If a photon comes in with a λ < λ{crit}, i.e. hc/λ ≥ E{g}, it'll create an
electron-hole pair. Contributions to n{p} and p{p}.

Characteristic lifetime measured in ns → ms, depending on parameters such
as doping: heavier doping ⇒ shorter lifetime. Defects, surfaces. If an
electron wanders over and sees the edge of the depletion region, it gets
shot back by the electric field.

Thermocouple, similar sort of thing. Vaguely similar. Probably similar.

So what about minority carriers? Right at the edge of the depletion region,
it's going to be essentially 0.

lifetime ⇒ diffusion length L{n}, L{p}. Minority carrier diffusion current
across edge of depletion region.

qD{n}∇n + qD{p}∇p. Approximate ∇n as n{p}/L{n}, ∇p as p{n}/L{p}.

So the actual current I{diff.min.carriers at edge of dep. reg} =
Aq(D{n}n{p}/L{n} + D{p}p{n}/L{p})

[ n{p} = n{i}²/N{A}, p{n} = n{i}²/N{D} ]

= Aqn{i}²(D{n}/(N{A}L{n}) + D{p}/(N{D}L{p})) = I{drift}. Eq 2.99.

Reverse bias Is
---------------

At zero bias (V{D}=0), I{drif} + I{diff} = 0 = I{D} (current on diode). In
reverse bias, V{D} < 0. We're increasing the electric field, so I{diff} →
0. I{diode} = I{drift} = I{s} (saturation current)

For V{D} < 3k{B}T/q, this might happen.

[ talk about what lifetime and diffusion length means. ]

One last thing to point out: saturation current depends on n{i}². Diode
leakage current is a huge function of temperature, as a result.

Linear increase in charge ⇒ quadratic increase in voltage.

Going through and deriving equations is tedious. Not terribly
educational. Results: with a voltage V{D} applied, width of the depletion
region W = X{n} + X{p} = [2ε(V₀-VD)/q (1/NA + 1/ND)]^{1/2}.

x{n} = W/(1+N{D}/N{A}). x{p} = W/(1+N{A}/N{D}).

Forward bias
------------

exponential current-stuffs.
