EE 105: Devices & Circuits
==========================
Friday, January 27, 2012.
-------------------------

Everywhere inside there you've got fixed trapped charges. Some number of P
or As charges per cc. We only draw them in the depletion region because
this is the region where they're actually exposed. (balanced with free
electron for charge neutrality outside of the depletion region -- inside
depletion region, no charge neutrality, which generates a very nice
electric field.)

Integration allows us to figure out what the built-in voltage is.

peak electric field as function of size of depletion region. Do a numeric
integral! E{max} is a function of x{n} and dopant and so on. We're not
going to do this; you can find it in your 130 textbook if you want. W, the
total width of the depletion region, x{n} + x{p}, is equal to √(2εV₀/q
(1/N{A} + 1/N{D})⁻¹).

Once you've got that W, you know that capacitance is equal to εA/d. C =
εA/W = ε/√(εV₀/q (1/N{A} + 1/N{D})⁻¹) = √(εq/(2V₀) N{A}N{D}/(N{A} +
N{D})). Freshman physics.

All of this stays the same, except we replace V₀ with V₀ - V{D}.

AC{j0}/√(1 - stuff)reverse bias:

	V{D} < 0, increasing E field, increasing W, decreasing C,
	decreasing diffusion, increasing barrier height.

forward bias:

	V{D} > 0, decreasing E field, decreasing W, increasing C,
	increasing diffusion, decreasing barrier height.

The model breaks down at some point. C{j0}[F/m²].

Varactor: variable capacitor.

electric breakdown: avalanche. lightning.

zener breakdown: 

Electrons are somewhat like ball bearings, and holes are somewhat like
bubbles. Initially, when you put these things together, the electrons float
across. This barrier appears because of electric field and stuff and grows
until it's big enough to keep electrons and holes from diffusing
across. Less and less energy as you go up. Probability of having energy is
exponential. It's less, but it's not zero. Every 26 meV I go up, I decrease
by a factor of e. Every 60, I decrease by a factor of 10.

The drift current is, these guys are wandering around. There's not many of
them on the p-side, etc. One of them wanders to the edge and gets shot to
the other side. Minority carriers that get too close to the edge.

all these things bend. conduction band on either side, distance between
fermi levels is, again, qv{r}. larger energy barrier.

thermal excitation. barrier even higher. probability gone down even
further. shut off diffusion of majority carriers. nothing done to change
diffusion of minority carriers.

zener: electrons actually want to move this way. all drawn in this
region. if i dope junctions heavily enough, i shrink depletion region
sufficiently and make the potential bigger. it's more stretched, and they
physically get closer. if this is narrow enough, i'll get an electron
that'll actually tunnel across this barrier. quantum tunneling, wave
function having some probability. black magics.

equations 2.91 — 2.99. " provable. "

Forward bias ⇒ reduced barrier height. That's the big handwave.

Last time, we talked about the diffusion we get or the drift current due to
minority carriers near the edge. We said that at equilibrium, I{drift} =
-I{S}; I{S} = qAn²{i} and more stuff

So we derived this, we also know that I{drift} + I{diff} = 0, since we're
at equilibrium. Therefore I{diff} (V{D} = 0) = I{S}, and we know that
diffusion current is exponential in this barrier energy thingy. So you've
got to get I{diff} = I{s} e^{V{D}/V{th}}. So now I{d} = I{drift} + I{diff}
= I{S}(e^{stuff} - 1).

Turn-on voltage. If I've got a diode with I{S} = 10⁻¹⁵ (an ideal diode) at
room temperature, what's the current going to be? 0 at no applied voltage;
at +26mV, I{D} = 10⁻¹⁵(e-1); et cetera sequantur.
