EE 105: Devices & Circuits
==========================
Monday, January 30, 2012.
-------------------------

graphing iv curve. turn-on voltage. exponentials look the same. Curve
just shifts to right. No such thing as a turn-on voltage for a diode
without context.

SPICE
=====
all right. so. now, let me say a little bit about SPICE. Every company
has their own flavor of spice. All of those trees trace their origin
back to Cory Hall. Don Peterson and his group. Simulation program,
integrated circuit emphasis. Used all over: electromechanical systems,
mems, thermal systems, biological systems, etc. Anyway, SPICE is so
widely used because it was built by people who needed to use it. Also,
it was put in public domain. Good things come out of putting things in
public domain.

SPICE. What is it? The idea is that you've got a core program that
implements models of device physics (and these evolve over time) that
different companies (and there's a framework where you can build your
own understanding of device physics) 

level 1 through 200 or something like that for MOSFETs. Extensible
device physics modeling here for these things.

There's a net list or schematic that says how are these hooked up, the
concept of having nodes with node voltages (natural for circuits
people to think about) – you get to do it graphically in LTSpice.

It does generate inside of there and spit out a net list.

And then there's device model statements in there, like 2M3904. That's
a particular BJT that you've got that you're using in the lab. It has
particular parameters that then go in and get used by the device
physics inside of this thing.

When you create the model for the 3904, you're using the
parameters. e.g. doping levels and more.

And then there's a whole bunch of simulation engines that live inside
of this that take all this stuff and spit out a bunch of results.

Since you've got LTSpice, there's a graphical interface. There's also
text-based stuff, esp. the .op files.

So. *.op*, probably the most important one, this one is a nonlinear
coupled equation solver. The idea is you wire it with some circuit,
and you run .op on that, and it tells you what the voltage is going to
be on that thing. Bottom line is, you've got a nonlinear equation
here. Fundamentally, you're stuck with this transcendental
equation. Pretty much have to use numerical methods for that.

This gives you a "DC" (static) operating point. Most important because
it's often the one people ignore, and they don't understand why
fancier simulations aren't giving them the results they expect.

Single most important thing to do is check what the DC voltages are at
each node (_starts with the power supply_), and see if they match up
with your internal model.

Then, *.fran* does nonlinear time-varying ordinary differential equation
solution. Very broad class, but with nodal analysis, you've got these
nonlinear equations, and you throw a capacitor in there, and all of a
sudden you've got dynamics.

*.ac* is the linearized transfer function you get from a defined input
to a defined output. How much is the output going to wiggle, and how
much does it depend on frequency? This is where we're going to spend
most of the semester.

So that's what SPICE does. The linearization, by the way, if I plot I-V
on a particular scale, you know that you're operating within an
approximate range. One way to solve circuits like this is to use
first-order Taylor approximation.

[ talk about what we'll have to do for our homework ]

What you find is as long as your signals are small, you don't have too
much error.

On the homework, this is your first introduction to the idea.

Zeners
======

Most zeners that you buy are actually avalanche diodes that don't
actually use the zener effect. What if you had a diode that had a
region of very low doping in between the P and N regions (PIN ⇒
P-Insulator-N)? Holds up very well against reverse bias. Could be used
in power supplies. Not too useful any more, since power is actually
precious. Also works with AC voltage. Step one, put it through a diode
to rectify it, then put it through a resistor, then through a zener, a
cap to flatten things out. Very useful power supply.

[ talk about solar cells. Optimum value, talks about quadrants in which
  devices operate. Most in Q1/3. Solar cells in Q4. ]

Schottky discovered this effect that when you have a metal-silicon
junction, you get a similar effect to what we see with N+-P+. It's
slightly different. You have the conduction band for the metal, and
you actually get the band bending, and your N-type semiconductor ends
up with its electrons right there.

It turns out when you do this, this barrier is lower. The result is
you don't need to put very much forward bias on these things for the
electrons to overcome the barrier. High current at low forward
bias. Also fast. One thing we haven't discussed is speed. Turns out,
it takes a while for most diodes to recombine. And while they're
recombining, you've still got current flowing through these things.

So instead of dropping 500mV with a silicon diode, you could drop 50mV
with a Schottky. And of course if you want this thing to be a
regulated voltage, you throw on yet another diode.

Any questions on diodes? All right. Now I'm going to draw some more
diodes. But that's because we're going to start talking about bipolar
junction transistors. So. Recall: if I have an N+-P device with 10¹⁷
and 10¹⁵. When I put it in forward bias, I get a big flood of
electrons flowing one way and holes flowing the other way, and it's
driven by diffusion as per Fick's Law.

So forward bias, I've got I{n} is roughly 100x I{p}. That's basically
all we need to recall.

So let's say we make two of these junctions in the same substrate. So
I have a p-type substrate, and I'm going to connect a voltage of that
of say .5V. I'm going to diffuse in an N+ region at much higher
carrier concentration, and I'm going to put another one right next to
it. Also, take potential up to 10V reverse bias on the left side. What
does this look like? We've got a depletion region, mostly in the
P-side, since that's more lightly doped. Very small in the N-side.

So which way does the electron go? Electric field from depletion
region is set up such that it's trying to shove all these electrons
back. Reverse bias. Turns out very few holes are going to show
up. There are some. Now, I'm going to take the right side, and
we're going to ground it. Forward bias.

Now I've got this massive current of electrons pouring out of this
thing. What's going to happen when they hit this barrier? They get
shot right across the depletion region. Huge concentration of
electrons here.

It turns out the current from the P-side is much much smaller. Tiny
trickle of p-type going back in. Huge gradient going down toward
it. Diffusion toward it, and once they hit it, there's drift.

AT&T labs were the first to do this. Germanium substrate with
insulating structure. emitter + collector on base. Figures we use
today use same labeling.
