EE 105: Devices & Circuits
==========================
Wednesday, February 1, 2012
---------------------------

Diodes
 * Small signal model
 
	 The idea is that nonlinearities are a pain, and you can basically use
	 a first-order Taylor approximation -- locally, everything is flat.

	 You may recall from basic physics, if you're trying to find some f(x),
	 find some f₀ that you know, then write f(x) as f₀ + Δx. Technically,
	 you'd use Newton linearization. Works great very close to the point,
	 i.e in the case of small-signal.

	 In particular, for a diode, ID = IsV^{VDD/Vth} (ideal diode). If I can
	 find a bias point, operating point, or whatever, and I've found some
	 point on this curve, then I can say for small variations around VD*,
	 we can use a small-signal variation about the operating point. It's
	 going to technically cause nonlinear variation, but with a small
	 enough signal, we can ignore the effects of higher-order
	 terms. Convention says that lower-case means small signal. Presumably
	 upper-case means large-signal, then.

	 total distortion you get from nonlinear terms that we threw out tends
	 to be listed as a spec. Human ears like some forms of distortion more
	 than other, so some people prefer tube amps over transistor amps.

	 Local coordinate system: good approximation close to the
	 center. Probably a good idea to check higher-order terms start
	 becoming non-negligible.

 * PTAT
 
	 Proportional to absolute temperature. Very useful circuit to
	 build. The central idea is this: if I have a diode, and I shove some
	 current I₀ through it, that's going to give me some voltage VD₁. If I
	 have some other diode, and I shove nI₀ through that diode, if these
	 two diodes are identical, I'll get some other voltage VD₂. If I
	 consider the difference between these voltages as Vx, Vx = VD₂ - VD₁ =
	 VT(ln n). The difference between these two voltages, then, is
	 proportional to temperature in Kelvin.

 * Voltage doubler

	 Charge pump: charge in parallel, discharge in series. Cap to smooth
	 things out, zener to limit.

BJT physics

	Recall: PN-junction. Next to no minority carriers in reverse
	bias. Base-emitter junction, base-collector junction.
