EE 105: Devices & Circuits
==========================
Friday, February 3, 2012
------------------------

So, in talking to some of you about hte homework, I realized there's at
least one thing on there. When I say ideal diode, I mean *exponential
response of current to voltage*. Thinking about region of operation, small
signal model for 3-terminal devices.

Simple model for BJTs
=====================

If we consider a diode, and it looks like something, there's a bunch of
regions of operation of this diode. Power supplies: operating in vastly
different regions of said diode. If we're sitting in some zone and increase
bias voltage, what do we expect current change to be?

dI{D}/dV{T} = I{D}/V{T}.

rare that we care about something past second decimal point.

Small signal model in a particular region of operation. In region, I look
at conductance of diode (reciprocal of small signal resistance V{T}/I{D}).

So let's get back to the bipolar transistor, and, as we said, last time, if
I've got an N-type junction and a P-type junction, some depletion region in
there, some point called x₁, the concentration of carriers depends on
bias. Forward bias: magnitude of currents roughly proportional to magnitude
of doping.

Reverse bias, if P has a lower voltage than N, we've got a huge field, shut
down diffusion current, and any minority carrier can't diffuse
across. Increased energy barrier, made a cliff there, so when an electron
hits the cliff, it gets shot across. Minority concentration effectively 0:
any thermal noise causes them to get shot to the other side.

Let's say we've got two of these regions put back to back. NPN
transistor. Let's say we put this through a 1k resistor. Forward bias on
one PN junction. At that voltage, that causes 1 mA of current to flow
through this device. [ roughly where we were last time ]

n(x₁) = n{p₁}exp[V{BE}/V{T}]  { n{p₁} = n²{i}/N{A} }
n(x₂) = 0

Formula for diffusion current is J = D{n}(-q∇n)

transistor is magical: not very much base current: there's some holes
flowing across this junction, but orders of magnitude less than electrons
flowing. Also electron-hole recombination going on, so those need to be
replenished.

Essentially, you've got a small current controlling a much larger
current. Magical.

We've got a system. In particular operating conditions, this is 0.6V, and
the output is equal to 9V. This current I{C} in here depends exponentially
on my bias voltage. What happens if I increase this bias voltage by 26 mV?
Factor of e.
