EE 105: Devices & Circuits
==========================
Monday, February 6, 2012
------------------------

Few words about lab 2. Talk about BJTs, region of operation, \alpha, \beta,
small signal model, early effects. Monday's section, not everyone was able
to finish. You can go in to the lab any time during the day or night;
encouraged to do that. Seem to not like to leave cabinet unlocked, will try
to change that. Shouldn't take too long to finish. Report this time, will
give powerpoint template, circuits schematic.

Dopant diffusion (implant 8) 8-in or 12-in. 200mm or 300mm in diameter;
thickness is around 650 to 800 microns.

For bipolar, they start with a p-type wafer. Grow an n-type region on top
of that. And then use ion implantation and diffusion to make this
p-type. So now you've got a p-type wafer, lightly-doped n-type (heavily
underneath), and they're all surrounded by p-type material. Most negative
voltage, so we're never getting forward bias.

Forward active region of operation.

			 BE In
	  +---+-------+----------+
	  |   |Rev    |   Fwd    |
	  +---+-------+----------+
BC In |Rev|Cutoff |Forward   |
	  |   |       |active    |
	  +---+-------+----------+
	  |Fwd|Reverse|Saturation|
	  |   |active |          |
	  +---+-------+----------+

N^+PN^+, wouldn't care which way you ran. Work just the same. Curves would
be the same. Called reverse active.


We talked about this last time: let's say I increase V{be} by \delta
V{be}by 26mV. The 26mV here means that I increase I{c} by some \delta I{c}.
That will cause a decrease in voltage. \partial V{ce}/\partialV{bd}.

Operating point: where you first bias a device All of the extra \delta s
represent your small signal.
